Life Journey Through Autism:
A Guide for Transition to Adulthood
ORGANIZATION FOR AUTISM RESEARCH
Life Journey Through Autism:
A Guide for Transition to Adulthood
by
Organization for Autism Research
2111 Wilson Boulevard, Suite 401
Arlington, VA 22201
(866) 366-9710 (toll-free)
www.researchautism.org
This revised publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information concerning the subject matter covered. It is published with the understanding that the Organization for Autism Research, Inc. is not engaged in the render-
ing of legal, medical, or other professional services. If legal, medical, or other expert advice or assistance is required, the
services of a competent professional should be sought.
Originally published October 2006.
Copyright©
2021 Organization for Autism Research, Inc. All rights reserved.
No part of this work may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, includ-
ing photocopying and recording, or by any information storage or retrieval system, without prior written consent of the
Organization for Autism Research, Inc., unless such copying is expressly permitted by federal copyright law. Address all
inquiries to the Organization for Autism Research, Inc., 2111 Wilson Blvd., Suite 401, Arlington, VA 22201.
www.researchautism.org
ORGANIZATION FOR AUTISM RESEARCH
Research and resources that help families today!
Dear Readers,  September 2021
Twenty-four years ago, I began my journey in the autism world
when my son received his autism diagnosis. I became educated and
trained. I learned to navigate and advocate. During my son’s early
intervention, elementary education, and secondary education years,
I saw an exponential increase in autism awareness and services. I
experienced tremendous successes and milestones with my son in
school and at home. And just when I thought I could breathe, along
came adulthood on the horizon. Once again, a path for my son had
to be forged and, like fifteen years before, navigating the path was
daunting. If you are experiencing just that, thinking no one understands what you are facing,
and not sure where to begin – you can breathe, because OAR gets it.
Life Journey Through Autism: A Guide for Transition to Adulthood is a resource that takes you
through the adult transition journey. The guide provides information on laws and policies,
transition planning, postsecondary education, vocation and employment, and life skills, in-
cluding living arrangements, and health and safety goals. It does so methodically and com-
prehensively. To enhance the transition to adulthood, education and planning are key compo-
nents, and in developing this guide, OAR recognizes the importance of these factors.
OAR remains committed to enhancing the quality of life for individuals with autism by pro-
viding competent information and useful resources. OAR also remains committed to being
one step ahead in the autism education world – in fact, OAR’s foray into the adult transition
journey is not of recent vintage for this guide is an update of its original publication in 2006.
Transitioning into adulthood is one of the most significant steps in the life of an individual
with autism. This guide will help you to navigate and embrace that journey. In my view, this
adult transition guide is one of OAR’s most useful and impactful resources.
Sincerely,
Lori Lapin Jones
Lori Lapin Jones PLLC
Vice Chairwoman, Board of Directors
  v
Dear Readers, September 2021
In an ideal world, a student’s first day after graduating from high
school would not look much different from their last day of school.
That is, the transition planning and other preparation would have
been so well developed that the student’s progress did not come to
a sudden stop when school ended but simply continued uninter-
rupted.
Transitioning from one phase of life to the next should be seamless.
But accomplishing that requires a comprehensive approach to edu-
cation that gradually helps children move from the sandbox on the
playground in kindergarten to changing classes through middle school, and then on to work
and higher education after high school. For educators and parents, seeing and understanding
what goes into this kind of long-range planning and preparation within the larger system of
education and community supports can difficult.
Typically, parents and educators cannot rely on their own experience maturing into adulthood
when planning for the needs of their child or student with autism. That is where this guide
comes in for additional input and support. This guide helps draw attention to key areas of
consideration with regard to the transition to life after high school, not only for teaching and
instruction but also in terms of legal protections and the overall planning process. Much of
the dignity and success of adulthood comes from being able to do things for oneself, and every
child is entitled to grow into that place.
Contemplating transition planning from an ecological perspective, different readers will ben-
efit from different sections of this guide and at different points in the process. However, a fun-
damental focus throughout all the planning is the overwhelming importance of keeping the
goals and objectives of the person with autism at the center of the process. Ideally, the young
adult transitioning into adulthood drives the process themselves. Encourage them to engage
with this guide alongside with you and know which areas will be of greatest importance and
relevance to them. However, if they need support in interpreting and understanding the areas
where they need help, those providing such support – whether parents, family members, or
educators – must be mindful of the young adult’s goals and dreams.
We only have a limited time frame in which to leverage public school services. Schools can be
a rich resource, but they often vary in quality based on a myriad factors, including state and
vi   
local policy as well as funding. Regardless of such differences, a fairly universal constant is the
reality that once access to schooling ends, support opportunities dwindle, making it essential
to get as much out of the school years as possible. This guide provides a roadmap for individu-
als with autism, their parents, and their teachers as they together advocate for the supports and
instruction that will help maximize post-school outcomes.
As a society, we lose a tremendous amount of human capital when we fail to help all students
reach their full potential – a loss that, in turn, diminishes what our communities can become.
When we optimize opportunities for everyone and provide the support, structure, and instruc-
tion to everyone as they need it, the entire community benefits. Hopefully, this transition
guide will serve as a resource in pursuit of these ends.
Sincerely,
Kevin M. Ayres, Ph.D., BCBA-D
The University of Georgia
  vii
Dear Readers, September 2021
The Embassy of the State of Qatar in the United States is a proud spon-
sor of the Organization for Autism Research. OAR provides a vital ser-
vice that helps students build friendships with their autistic peers to
help create inclusive and supportive educational environments. Their
work does not just foster the developmental needs of people on the Au-
tism Spectrum, it also ensures they find acceptance and understanding
in their communities.
I have personally experienced the work OAR is doing, having had the
honor of meeting with OAR’s Executive Director, Michael Maloney,
during a visit by autism leadership to Doha in 2020. OAR’s passion and dedication to the work
they do is life changing for so many young people, and we look forward to partnering together
to further enhance the programs they offer to students and educators across the United States.
The State of Qatar has a long history of supporting Autism initiatives at home and around the
world. In 2007, Her Highness Sheikha Moza bint Nasser first proposed World Autism Aware-
ness Day to the United Nations General Assembly. The Embassy of the State of Qatar in the
United States has followed her example and is dedicated to supporting the US autism com-
munity nationwide. We are committed to facilitating organizations that teach essential skills,
provide career opportunities, and build independence for individuals on the spectrum. We
subscribe to a holistic viewpoint that true progress comes from providing resources to people
with autism, their caregivers, and the community at large, and OAR is a prime example of an
organization that is doing just that.
Thank you OAR for your commitment to the autism community, and thank you reader for
enriching your knowledge on inclusivity and engagement. Together we can build a society ac-
cepting of all abilities.
With renewed appreciation,
Fatema Al-Baker
Director of Public Diplomacy Outreach
viii   
ORGANIZATION FOR AUTISM RESEARCH
Research and resources that help families today!
Board of Directors
James M. Sack
Chairman
McLean, VA
Lori Lapin Jones
Vice Chairwoman
Great Neck, NY
Marie Johnson
Treasurer
Herndon, VA
Michael V. Maloney
Executive Director and Secretary
Arlington, VA
Elizabeth Cavaliere
Tampa, FL
Roberto Datorre
Elizabethtown, PA
William Donlon
Hicksville, NY
Cathy Schwallie Farmer
Berkeley, CA
Anthony Ferrera
Flemington, NJ
Peter Gerhardt, Ed.D.
Chair, Scientific Council
New Milford, NJ
Lisa Hussman
Ellicott City, MD
Stephen Shore, Ed.D.
Newton, MA
Gregory L. Smith
Lorton, VA
Joseph Mangalasseril Thomas
Naperville, IL
  ix
ORGANIZATION FOR AUTISM RESEARCH
Research and resources that help families today!
Scientific Council
OAR’s Scientific Council is comprised of 20 leading autism and medical professionals and
serves as an expert information resource for all OAR matters concerning issues of research. The
Council assists OAR’s Board of Directors in developing its research strategy, near-term priorities,
and long-range research objectives. The Council also provides program guidance and oversight
for OAR’s research competition and plays a central role in ensuring the highest quality reviews
for OAR research proposals.
Peter F. Gerhardt, Ed.D.
Chairman
Executive Director, EPIC School
Paramus, NJ
Joanne Gerenser, Ph.D.
Vice Chairwoman
Executive Director, Eden II Programs
Staten Island, NY
Shahla Ala’i, Ph.D., BCBA-D
Associate Professor,
Department of Behavior Analysis
University of North Texas
Denton, TX
Kevin M. Ayres, Ph.D., BCBA-D
Professor, Co-Director,
Center for Autism and Behavioral Education
University of Georgia
Athens, GA
Teal Benevides, Ph.D., MS, OTR/L
Associate Professor,
Department of Occupational Therapy
Augusta University
Jonathan Campbell, Ph.D.
Professor and Director,
PsyD Program, Department of Psychology
Western Carolina University
Cullowhee, NC
Kara Hume, Ph.D.
Associate Professor, School of Education
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC
SungWoo Kahng, Ph.D., BCBA-D
Chair, Department of Applied Psychology
Rutgers University
Piscataway, NJ
Gerald P. Koocher, Ph.D.
Faculty,
Boston Children’s Hospital and
Harvard Medical School
Boston, MA
Suzanne Letso, M.A., BCBA
Co-Founder and Chief Executive Officer,
Milestones Behavioral Services
Milford, CT
x   
Michael Londner, M.D., M.P.H., M.B.A.
Berkeley Medical Center, WVU East
Martinsburg, WV
James A. Mulick, Ph.D.
Professor, Department of Psychology
College of Social and Behavioral Sciences
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH
Daniel Openden, Ph.D., BCBA-D
President and CEO,
Southwest Autism Research &
Resource Center
Phoenix, AZ
Dora M. Raymaker, Ph.D.
Research Assistant Professor,
Portland State University
Portland, OR
Paul Shattuck, Ph.D.
Senior Fellow, Mathematica
Portland, ME
Rachel Taylor, Ph.D., BCBA-D
Founder and Chief Executive Officer,
Center for Applied Behavior Analysis
Founder, CABA Consulting
Los Angeles, CA
Mary Jane Weiss, Ph.D., BCBA
Professor of Education and
Director of Programs in ABA and Autism,
Endicott College
Beverly, MA
Oliver Wendt, Ph.D.
Director,
Research Lab on Augmentative
and Alternative Communication in
Autism and Developmental Disabilities
University of Central Florida
Orlando, FL
Patricia Wright, Ph.D., MPH
Program Development SVP,
NEXT for AUTISM
New York, NY
Thomas Zane, Ph.D.
Director,
Online Applied Behavior
Analysis Programs
University of Kansas
Lawrence, KS
  xi
ORGANIZATION FOR AUTISM RESEARCH
Research and resources that help families today!
Staff
Michael V. Maloney
Executive Director
Kristen Essex
Deputy Executive Director
Rachel Luizza
Manager, Development and Marketing
Kimberly Ha
Director, Research and Programs
Hannah Ehrenberg
Programs and Outreach Associate
Amanda Rioux
Manager, Hire Autism
Courtney Carroll
Hire Autism Associate
Sean Flynn
Director, RUN FOR AUTISM
Sarah Rodis
Senior Coordinator, RUN FOR AUTISM
xii   
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The first edition of this guide was published in 2006 as a collaborative product between
the Organization for Autism Research (OAR), the Southwest Autism Research & Resource
Center (SARCC), and Danya International, Inc. (Danya). OAR and SARCC are dedicated
to providing practical information to those living with the challenges of autism – individuals,
families, educators, and other professionals.
First-edition (2006) writers:
Peter Gerhardt, Ed.D.
Kristen Holtz, Ph.D.
Nicole Owings
Amanda Ziegert
First-edition graphics and layout:
Yen-Wen Chau
Suzanne E. Willis
Thank you to the following contributors for the new content of this revised edition of Life
Journey Through Autism: A Guide for Transition to Adulthood (2021):
Second-edition (2021) writers:
Kimberly Ha
Amanda Ziegert
Margaret Gorman
Melissa Hochberg
Alisa Morrison
Sallie Nowell, Ph.D., CCC-SLP
Tabitha Ramminger, BCBA
Cover Design:
Lisa Cain Design LLC
Second-edition graphics and layout:
Michael Mysik
In addition to the members of the Board of Directors, Scientific Council, staff, and writers,
special thanks go to the following for their contribution to the content and editing of Life
Journey Through Autism: A Guide for Transition to Adulthood: Camilla McMahon, Cathleen
Caldway, Naina Chernoff, Dena Gassner, Joanna Mussey, Lori Lapin Jones, Sheila Krein,
Amanda Rioux, and Lance Silberstein.
Funding Support
Special recognition goes to Lori Lapin Jones PLLC for its continued interest in the needs of
individuals with ASD. The development and distribution of this guide were made possible
thanks to the generous support of Lori Lapin Jones PLLC.
  xiii
Special recognition also goes to the Embassy of the State of Qatar in Washington, D.C. for its
continued interest in the needs of individuals with ASD and for its generous support of this
project.
About the Embassy of the State of Qatar in the United States
The Embassy of the State of Qatar in Washington, D.C. houses Qatar’s diplomatic mission to
the United States. The primary purposes of the Embassy of Qatar are to highlight Qatar’s poli-
cies on regional issues, strengthen Qatar-U.S. bilateral relations, and to assist Qatari citizens
who travel or live in the U.S. The current Ambassador of the State of Qatar to the United States
of America is His Excellency Sheikh Meshal Bin Hamad Al-Thani.
Over the past 20 years, the State of Qatar has been a leader in advancing autism research and
awareness campaigns in the Middle East and around the world. As one of the original coun-
tries that proposed Autism Awareness Day, the State of Qatar is committed to improving au-
tism awareness and support services for individuals on the spectrum and their families. In the
United States, the Embassy of the State of Qatar hosts an annual gala that supports autism
initiatives, while working year-round with grassroots community organizations that build in-
clusive environments for all people. Scan this QR code to learn more about Qatar’s efforts in
autism advocacy and research in the United States and in Qatar.
xiv   
CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
INTRODUCTION
Using the Guide                                                                                2
CHAPTER 1: AGENCY HELP/LEGAL INFORMATION
Laws and Policies                                                                              5
IDEA, Section 504, ADA, and the Transition Process                                              7
State and Federal Agencies That Can Assist in the Transition Process                             8
Resources                                                                                    10
✒ HANDOUT 1-1: Comparison of ADA, IDEA, Section 504 Legislation                          11
✒ HANDOUT 1-2: State/Federal Agencies for Transition Assistance                            13
✒ ACTIVITY 1-1: Contact Log Sheet                                                         15
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
 
Planning to Plan – Reflecting on and Gathering Information
to Build Your Child’s Transition Plan                                                          18
The Transition Plan                                                                            23
Implementing and Monitoring the Transition Plan                                              26
Resources                                                                                    27
✏ ACTIVITY 2-1: Making Action Plans (MAPs)                                                29
✏ ACTIVITY 2-2: My Dreams for the Future                                                 30
✒ ACTIVITY 2-3: Examining Strengths and Challenges                                       31
✒ ACTIVITY 2-4: Building on Experience                                                    32
✒ ACTIVITY 2-5: Your Support Network                                                     33
✒ HANDOUT 2-1: Sample IEP Transition Plan                                                34
✒ HANDOUT 2-2: Example SMART Goals                                                     36
✏ ACTIVITY 2-6: Documenting Overarching Goals for Transition                             37
CHAPTER 3: STUDENT-CENTERED TRANSITION PLANNING
Self-Determination Skills                                                                       39
Centering the Student in Transition Planning                                                   40
Self-Determination Tips by Learning Style                                                      43
Resources                                                                                    44
✒ HANDOUT 3-1: Preparing for the Transition Planning Meeting                              45
✏ ACTIVITY 3-1: Questions About Personal Interests                                        47
✏ ACTIVITY 3-2: Developing Self-Advocacy Skills                                            48
✏ ACTIVITY 3-3: Goal Plan                                                                 50
✏ ACTIVITY 3-4: Self-Determination Checklist                                               51
✏ ACTIVITY 3-5: Your Person-Centered Planning Meeting                                   52
CHAPTER 1:
CHAPTER 4: VOCATION AND EMPLOYMENT
Transition Planning                                                                            53
Planning Sequence – Starting Early                                                             54
The Evolving Nature of Work                                                                   55
Categories of Employment                                                                     56
Job Search                                                                                    59
Ensuring Success on the Job                                                                   59
Reinforcing Success – Supporting the New Employee                                           62
Resources                                                                                    62
✒ HANDOUT 4-1: Job Possibilities                                                            65
✒ HANDOUT 4-2: When (and If!) to Disclose                                                  67
✒ HANDOUT 4-3: Reasonable and Common Job Accommodations                            70
CHAPTER 5: POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION
Preparing for Postsecondary Education – Where to Go and What to Study                       71
Self-Advocacy: A Key Skill in a College Environment                                             72
Skills Essential to College Success                                                              74
Setting Up – and Using – Support Services                                                      74
Resources                                                                                    76
✒ ACTIVITY 5-1: Comparing Postsecondary Programs                                       77
CHAPTER 6: LIFE SKILLS
Living Arrangements                                                                          79
Preparing Early                                                                                81
Resources                                                                                    84
✒ HANDOUT 6-1: Life Skills                                                                  87
✒ HANDOUT 6-2: Functional Skills                                                           88
✒ HANDOUT 6-3: Health and Safety Skills                                                    90
✒ HANDOUT 6-4: Exercise and Personal Health                                              92
✒ ACTIVITY 6-5: Medical Health Form                                                       93
CHAPTER 7: LOOKING AHEAD
People Involved                                                                               95
Developing a Lifestyle Plan                                                                    95
Legal Planning                                                                                96
Financial Planning                                                                             98
Resources                                                                                   100
✒ ACTIVITY 7-1: Template for Letter of Intent                                              101
✒ ACTIVITY 7-2: Calculating Future Expenses                                              105
Some Final Comments                                                                        107
xvi    Contents
INTRODUCTION
The transition from school to adulthood is a pivotal time in the lives of all students. For a
student with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), change of any kind can be challenging, and
a transition as momentous as this can seem especially daunting.
As a parent of an autistic young adult, you have already accomplished a lot, from coping with
the diagnosis to addressing all the challenges you may have faced over your child’s school years.
And you will continue to play a large role in the transition-related self-discovery and planning
process for your autistic young adult. Thoughtful planning, sound information, and open
communication will help you support your young adult and their transition team to create a
solid transition plan that leads to success. It is the goal of this guide to support your family
with this process.
Federal law requires that a transition plan be developed for autistic learners beginning at age 16.
In practical terms, however, transition planning should begin sooner; generally, it should begin
no later than age 14. But regardless of when the plan is developed, it becomes an integral part
of the Individualized Education Program (IEP) and carries the same legal authority. The goal of
the transition plan is to facilitate the movement from school to the world of adult work, living,
and community participation.
Transition planning, therefore, refers to a process that uncovers, develops, and documents the
skills, challenges, goals, and tasks that will be important as a student moves from school to
adulthood. This is both an official process and one of personal discovery, which you and your
young adult will undertake with the help of their school and other concerned professionals.
Approaching transition planning with a positive goal orientation will help create a successful
and rewarding process for both you and your autistic young adult.
The 2004 revision of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) defines “transition
services” as a coordinated set of activities for a child with a disability that is:
▶ Results-oriented – focused on improving the academic and functional achievement of
the young adult with a disability
▶ Supportive – designed to facilitate the young adult’s movement from school to post-
school activities, including postsecondary education, vocational education, integrated
or supported employment, continuing and adult education, adult services, indepen-
dent living, or community participation
  1
INTRODUCTION
▶ Student-centered – based on the individual young adult’s needs, taking into account
strengths, preferences, and interests
▶ Comprehensive – including instruction and related services, community experiences,
the development of employment and other post-school adult living objectives, and,
when appropriate, acquisition of daily living skills and functional vocational evaluation
Effective transition is central to more independent, involved, and enjoyable adult lives for au-
tistic learners. As such, it always starts with vision: Where will this individual be at the end of
this process? What skills will this individual have? What contexts will be the best for them to
apply these skills?
Lewis Carroll, author of the children’s classic Alice in Wonderland, wrote, “If you don’t know
where you are going, any path will take you there.” By following the suggestions in this guide,
you and your autistic young adult will know where you are going, and a sound transition plan
will be your path to getting there – a successful adulthood for your autistic young adult.
USING THE GUIDE
Think of this as a user’s manual for the transition to adulthood. With that in mind, every young
adult’s interests and needs are different. What works for one young adult may not be as impor-
tant or useful for your child. Use this guide in whatever way works best for you. You may read
about one issue at a time while completing the associated activities, or you may glance at what
to expect in the years to come. Learn from and customize the guide’s contents so that it may
work for you and your family when you need it.
Language and Terminology
This guide is written for parents and guardians of autistic individuals who are preparing to tran-
sition into adulthood. With that in mind, the guide will refer to “your child,” “your teen,” and
“your young adult” interchangeably throughout.
Autism is also a spectrum disorder, characterized by a continuum of abilities and challenges.
Throughout the guide, we will use the word autism to represent this disorder and spectrum.
INTRODUCTION
Using the Guide
2   
Icons
Throughout the text, you will find icons that highlight specific types of resources. Look for the
following icons:
🖥  
The computer icon denotes a reference to an online resource.
✒  
The pen icon denotes a reference to a handout or activity for parents
at the end of that chapter.
✏  
The pencil icon denotes a reference to a handout or activity for students
at the end of that chapter.
Key Points
Throughout the text, you will see concepts that are bolded for emphasis.
 
At the end of each chapter, you will also see a summary of important points to
consider.
References
Throughout the text, you will see citations such as the following: (author, year). The full refer-
ence for that citation can be found at the end of the chapter in the Resources section. It may
be helpful to use these sections if you are interested in reading more details from the primary
source.
Handouts and Activities
Each chapter of the guide includes handouts and activities related to the content of the chap-
ter. Handouts include supplementary information such as tip sheets or detailed informational
charts. Activities include worksheets and other templates that you or your child can fill out to
work on the skills discussed in that specific chapter.
INTRODUCTION
Using the Guide   3
CHAPTER 1: AGENCY HELP/LEGAL INFORMATION
1
AGENCY HELP/
LEGAL INFORMATION
Your young adult is protected by certain laws and policies that will help during the transition
process and throughout life. This chapter provides a brief overview of the key laws you should
be aware of, while also introducing you to agencies that can help you sort out this information
and its implications for you and your young adult’s specific situation.
LAWS AND POLICIES
Three laws overlap to benefit and safeguard you and your autistic young adult as you begin the
transition process: IDEA, Section 504 of the Vocational Rehabilitation Act, and the Americans
with Disabilities Act (ADA). These laws help you and your young adult to access the most ap-
propriate services to prepare for the transition to post-high school life. In addition, the federal
Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) of 2015 addresses the educational needs of autistic indi-
viduals and will also be briefly discussed.
Individuals with Disabilities Education Improvement Act (IDEA 2004)
The evaluation, planning process, and subsequent services that your young adult receives at
school are all provided because of IDEA requirements. That is, the IDEA provides federal
funding to state and local school systems to provide special education services to eligible stu-
dents with disabilities and guides how states and school systems provide services to these chil-
dren. Specifically, the IDEA goals are to:
▶ Ensure that all children with disabilities receive free appropriate public education
▶ with special education and related services designed to meet their specific needs
▶ Prepare them for postsecondary experiences, employment, and independent living
▶ Protect the rights of children with disabilities and their parents
CHAPTER 1: AGENCY HELP/LEGAL INFORMATION
Laws and Policies
6   
▶ Assist states, federal agencies, and schools in providing an education to allchildren with
disabilities in the least restrictive environment
▶ Evaluate the effectiveness of educating children with disabilities
IDEA protects your young adult starting at age of 3 and continuing to 21 years old. It ensures
that children with disabilities receive the services they need in relation to their strengths, chal-
lenges, and interests. IDEA requirements are facilitated through the IEP process. By age 16 (at
the latest), the IEP process must include transition planning services that are:
▶ Outcome-oriented
▶ Based on the child’s strengths and areas of need
▶ Focused on instruction and services for education, employment, and other postsecond-
ary living skills
The amended IDEA (2004) also contains a requirement that says schools must provide a sum-
mary of performance to students once they transition from high school. This summary should
include information about academic achievement and performance, as well as recommenda-
tions for individualized strategies useful for meeting transition goals. By adding to the require-
ments for transition planning, this provision strengthens the planning process.
It is important to note, however, that the IDEA protections you and your young adult are en-
titled to receive no longer apply once your child leaves high school or turns 21. This means
that after that, it is up to you and your child to actively seek out the appropriate services and
supports offered by the other laws that take its place, including Section 504 of the Vocational
Rehabilitation Act and ADA.
Section 504 of the Vocational Rehabilitation Act and ADA
While you are most likely already familiar with the requirements of IDEA, you may be less
familiar with Section 504 of the Vocational Rehabilitation Act and ADA. Whereas the IDEA
mandates education and services for students, Section 504 and ADA are civil rights laws de-
signed to protect people with disabilities from disability-related discrimination concerning
services (such as school), employment, and public accommodations (e.g., equal access to a
preferred restaurant). Section 504 applies to any institution (e.g., school systems) that receives
federal funds; the more expansive protections under ADA apply to state and local government
services as well as a number of public services, whether or not they receive federal funds. Both
Section 504 and ADA require that students with disabilities not be denied access to services or
supports that may be necessary to meet their needs or would be available to students without
disabilities. Please note, however, that Section 504 and ADA are intended to promote equal
access to activities and services and not to serve as guarantees of the appropriateness of the ser-
vices accessed.
CHAPTER 1: AGENCY HELP/LEGAL INFORMATION
IDEA, Section 504, ADA, and the Transition Process   7
To be eligible for these protections, a child has to have (a) a physical or mental impairment
that limits at least one major life activity (e.g., functions such as caring for oneself, performing
manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working) and (b) a
history of this impairment in a major life area. An individual with a diagnosis of ASD quali-
fies for both Section 504 and ADA, which take on greater significance in adulthood when the
entitlement protections offered under IDEA cease to be in effect.
IDEA, SECTION 504, ADA, AND THE TRANSITION PROCESS
The following lists summarize how these laws specifically impact your young adult during
the transition process. Handout 1-1: Comparison of ADA, IDEA, and Section 504 Legislation
(on page 11) provides more detailed information.
▶ IDEA requires a transition plan once your child reaches age 16 (certain states require it
at age 14). Thisplan must have the following characteristics:
▷  
An outcome-oriented system based on your child’s strengths, areas of interest, and
accommodations
▷ A transition plan that is monitored and revised as your child gets older
▷ A team approach based on the specific services your child needs
▷  
A process that cannot be changed or modified without your knowledge and consent
(that is, until your child reaches the age of 18 and can independently make changes
for themselves)
▷ Involvement of the autistic learner to ensure their goals and needs are addressed
▷  
Services that help address the skills and accommodations needed to prepare for tran-
sitioning post-high school
▷  
A summary of services acquired during the transition process to assist post-high school
▶ Section 504 and ADA work together to ensure that an autistic learner cannot bedis-
criminated against in school and beyond by providing:
▷ Equal opportunities to students with disabilities
▷ Access to supportive services (such as an in-classroom aid)
▷ Protections for the young adult post-high school (in college or at work)
▷ Accessibility to all programs, including extracurricular activities
▷ Protections for autistic learners in education and employment
CHAPTER 1: AGENCY HELP/LEGAL INFORMATION
State and Federal Agencies That Can Assist in the Transition Process
8   
Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA 2015)
The Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA) of 2015 replaced the No Child Left Behind Act of
2001. ESSA requires that all students be taught to high academic standards and be prepared to
succeed in college and careers. Each state is required to work with parents to develop their state
plan, determine accountability indicators of success, and release public report cards regarding
school performance. In addition, ESSA may complement IDEA by funding college and career
planning, career and technical education, and dual-enrollment classes in postsecondary insti-
tutions, all of which can play a role in transition planning. Refer to your state’s Department of
Education website for specific information on your state’s ESSA plan.
 
STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES
THAT CAN ASSIST IN THE TRANSITION PROCESS
The transition process can be confusing, but there are people and organizations outside of your
school that can help you make sense of all the available information (Handout 1-2: State and
Federal Agencies for Transition Assistance (on page 13)). This section highlights various agen-
cies and services that may be useful to you and your young adult as you begin the transition
process. Eligibility standards vary widely from state to state, so you may find that some of
the resources listed here are unavailable to you, at least initially. If your young adult is denied
services, a good rule of thumb is to always seek an appeal.
State Special Education Agencies
Each state’s Department of Education has a Special Education Agency. These agencies offer
state-specific information about transition requirements and planning, and provide addi-
tional information on the application of IDEA and ESSA. State contacts can be found at
https://www2.ed.gov/about/contacts/state/index.html.
Division of Vocational Rehabilitation
Vocational rehabilitation is a nationwide federal program that helps people with disabilities find
employment. Each state has a Division of Vocational Rehabilitation (DVR) agency or depart-
ment, and many states also have local DVR offices. These agencies are designed to help people
with disabilities prepare for, find, and keep a job, and can evaluate the individual’s strengths and
provide training and assistance, as needed. Some state DVR agencies have yearslong waitlists,
depending on the individual state and the individual’s identified disability category.
CHAPTER 1: AGENCY HELP/LEGAL INFORMATION
State and Federal Agencies That Can Assist in the Transition Process   9
During the transition planning process, a DVR representative may participate in one or more
transition planning meetings (these meetings are discussed further in Chapter 2). These rep-
resentatives specialize in the services and accommodations that may be useful as your young
adult prepares for the transition post-high school. If a DVR representative has not attended
a transition meeting for your child, ask your transition planning team to arrange for such a
meeting. Generally, the majority of services offered by state DVRs are time-limited and of a less
intensive nature than many autistic individuals require. Still, particularly if your young adult
child demonstrates fairly significant levels of independence, coordinating with your state DVR
is a critical step. To find your state agency, search the internet for “Vocational Rehabilitation”
and your state, or go to https://askearn.org/state-vocational-rehabilitation-agencies/.
Administration on Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities
Under the Developmental Disabilities Act, the Administration on Intellectual and Developmental
Disabilities (AIDD) is charged with ensuring that individuals with developmental disabilities
and their families receive the services and support for which they are eligible (although funding
may sometimes be unavailable). The ultimate goal of AIDD is to support the independence,
growth, and productivity of people with developmental disabilities. (As previously noted, the
availability of services through state AIDD agencies varies widely from state to state.)
Known variously from state to state as “Division of Developmental Disabilities” (New Jersey),
“Office for People With Developmental Disabilities” (New York), or “Department of Develop-
mental Services” (California), to name a few, each state has an AIDD charged with providing
post-graduation training, education, and support. As such, a representative from your state’s
developmental disabilities agency should be involved in the transition planning process. AIDD
agencies are listed by state at https://www.nasddds.org/state-agencies/.
STATE DVR AGENCIES MAY PROVIDE:
■ Diagnostic services
■ Vocational evaluation
■ Counseling
■ Training
■ Medical services and equipment
■ Placement assistance
■ Assistive technology
■ Support services
STATE AIDD AGENCIES SHOULD HAVE INFORMATION ON ACCESSING THE
FOLLOWING SERVICES:
■ Respite care
■ Family support
■ Residential assistance
■ Individual support
■ Transition planning
■ Behavioral support
■ Community living
■ Employment
CHAPTER 1: AGENCY HELP/LEGAL INFORMATION
Resources
10   
Finding the appropriate agency – and the best person to help you find the right information at
that agency – can be challenging and time-consuming. To make the process more manageable,
we recommend documenting your phone calls and other means of contact for later reference.
In Activity 1-1: Contact Log Sheet (on page 15), we have provided a sample log sheet that you
can use for this record keeping.
RESOURCES
▶ Organization for Autism Research. (2012). Life journey through autism: Navigating the special ed-
ucation system. https://www.researchautism.org/resources/navigating-the-special-education-
system/
▶ U.S. Department of Education. (2017). A transition guide to postsecondary education and employ-
ment for students and youth with disabilities. https://www.sites.ed.gov/idea/files/postsecondary-
transition-guide-may-2017.pdf
▶ U.S. Department of Education. (2010, August). Free appropriate public education for students with
disabilities. https://www.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/docs/edlite-FAPE504.html
▶ U.S. Department of Education. (n.d.). Office for Civil Rights. https://www.ed.gov/about/offices/
list/ocr
▶ U.S. Department of Education. (n.d.). Protecting students with disabilities. https://www.ed.gov/
about/offices/list/ocr/504faq.html
▶ Wright, P., & Wright, P. (2017, January 31). Key differences between Section 504, the ADA, and the
IDEA. Wrightslaw. https://www.wrightslaw.com/info/sec504.summ.rights.htm
KEY POINTS – CHAPTER 1
Three federal laws – IDEA, Section 504, and ADA – benefit and safeguard you and
your autistic young adult through the transition process.
IDEA protections end for young adults at age 21 or whenever they leave the public
school system.
Other laws, such as Section 504 and ADA, become more important when entering
adulthood; yet, you and your young adult must seek out these protections.
State and federal agencies may assist in the transition planning process;
however, coverage and availability vary by state.
Chapter 1: Handouts/Activities 
CHAPTER 1: AGENCY HELP/LEGAL INFORMATION
HANDOUT 1-1: Comparison of ADA, IDEA, Section 504 Legislation ✒
AMERICANS WITH
DISABILITIES ACT
(ADA), 1990
INDIVIDUALS WITH
DISABILITIES EDUCATION
ACT (IDEA), 1997/2004
SECTION 504 OF THE
REHABILITATION ACT,
1973
TYPE/PURPOSE
■ Civil rights law to prohi-
bit discrimination
■ Applies to public and
private schools
■ An education act that
guarantees free and
appropriate public edu-
cation
■ Does not apply to priva-
te schools
■ Civil rights law to prohi-
bit discrimination
■ Applies to public schools
and private schools that
receive federal funds
ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS
■ Documented diagnosis
of ASD
■ Qualified for the pro-
gram, service, or job
■ Documented diagnosis
of ASD
■ Age 3 to 21
■ Documented diagnosis
of ASD
■ Qualified for the pro-
gram, service, or job
RESPONSIBILITY TO PROVIDE A FREE, APPROPRIATE PUBLIC EDUCATION (FAPE)
■ Not directly
■ Provides additional pro-
tection in combination
with Section 504 and
IDEA
■ Reasonable accom-
modations to perform
essential functions of
the job
■ Also applies to nonsec-
tarian private schools
■ Yes ■ Yes
PROTECTIONS PROVIDED
■ Details the administra-
tive requirements, com-
plaint procedures, and
consequences for non-
compliance related
to both services and
employment
■ Individuals discrimina-
ted against may file a
complaint with the rele-
vant federal agency or
sue in federal court
■ Provides for procedural
safeguards and due pro-
cess rights to parents in
the identification, evalu-
ation, and educational
placement of their child
■ Disputes may be resol-
ved through mediation,
impartial due process
hearings, appeal of hea-
ring decisions, and/or
civil action
■ Requires notice to
parents regarding iden-
tification, evaluation,
and placement before
a “significant change” in
placement
■ Local education agenci-
es are required to provi-
de impartial hearings for
parents who disagree
with the identification,
evaluation, or placement
of their child
  11
CHAPTER 1: AGENCY HELP/LEGAL INFORMATION
AMERICANS WITH
DISABILITIES ACT
(ADA), 1990
INDIVIDUALS WITH
DISABILITIES EDUCATION
ACT (IDEA), 1997/2004
SECTION 504 OF THE
REHABILITATION ACT,
1973
STEPS/ACTIONS
■ Specifies provision of
reasonable accommo-
dations for eligible stu-
dents across educa-
tional activities and
settings
■ Reasonable accommo-
dations may include,
but are not limited to,
redesigning equipment,
assigning aides, provi-
ding written communi-
cation in alternative for-
mats, modifying tests,
reassigning services
to accessible locations,
altering existing facilities,
and building new facili-
ties
■ With parental consent,
an individualized evalua-
tion must be conducted
using a variety of tech-
nically sound, unbiased
assessment tools
■ Reevaluations are con-
ducted at least every
three years
■ Results are used to
develop an IEP that spe-
cifies the special edu-
cation, related servi-
ces, and supplemental
aids and services to be
provided to address the
child’s goals
■ Provides for a place-
ment evaluation that
must involve multip-
le assessment tools
tailored to assess spe-
cific areas of educatio-
nal need
■ Placement decisions
must be made by a team
of persons familiar with
the student on the basis
of their evaluation infor-
mation and placement
options
■ Provides for periodic
re­
evaluation
■ Parental consent is not
required for evaluation
or placement
FromERICClearinghouseonDisabilityandGiftedEducation.(2001).OverviewofADA,IDEA,andSection504:
Update 2001. https://www.ericdigests.org/2002-1/ada.html
✒ HANDOUT 1-1: Comparison of ADA, IDEA, Section 504 Legislation
12   
CHAPTER 1: AGENCY HELP/LEGAL INFORMATION
HANDOUT 1-2: State/Federal Agencies for Transition Assistance ✒
STATE SPECIAL EDUCATION AGENCIES
Description Services Offered
Designed to ensure a free and
appropriate public education for
students protected under IDEA
■ State-specific transition information
■ State-specific ESSA information
■ Dispute resolution
DIVISION OF VOCATIONAL REHABILITATION (DVR)
Description Services Offered
Designed to help people with disabilities
obtain, maintain, and/or improve
employment
A federally funded program administered
by individual states
■ Participation in transition planning mee-
tings (when planning for work post-high
school)
■ Assessment of an individual’s strengths,
skills, and interests in relation to employ-
ment
■ Career counseling and goal setting
■ Training for job skills and maintaining
employment
■ Help with independent living skills that
will aid in obtaining a job
■ Job search and placement assistance
■ Help with obtaining assistive technolo-
gy (e.g., special computer software, visual
aids) to use in the workplace
ADMINISTRATION ON INTELLECTUAL AND DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES (AIDD)
Description Services Offered
Provides services to individuals with
developmental disabilities to help them
achieve independence, productivity, inclu-
sion, and community involvement
Federal agency responsible for adminis-
tering the Developmental Disabilities Act;
each state has its own developmental
disability agency or council
■ Respite care
■ Programs for families
■ Residential living services and support
■ Transportation
■ Behavioral support
■ Legal advice and services
■ Advocacy
■ Transition planning services
■ Employment support
  13
Questions? Call OAR at 866.366.9710 or email scholarship@researchautism.org
www.researchautism.org
Organization for Autism Research’s Scholarship Program
OAR is proud to support the postsecondary, undergraduate education or vocational-technical training of qualified individuals with an
autism spectrum diagnosis through its $3,000 scholarships. Since 2008, OAR has awarded scholarships to over 400 students
across the United States! OAR offers two scholarships – see which one is right for you.
Who can apply?
Anyone with an established autism diagnosis and who will
be enrolled full time at an accredited postsecondary institution
of higher education in the United States during the school
year following the application process may apply.
There is no age limit!
When can I apply?
Applications are open annually from early December
to early May.
Where can I apply?
Applications are only accepted online – learn more at
bit.ly/OARScholarships.
Which scholarship should I apply for?
• The Schwallie Family Scholarship is for students attending
two- or four-year undergraduate colleges or universities.
• The Lisa Higgins Hussman Scholarship is for students
attending two-year universities, life skills or
postsecondary programs, or vocational, technical,
or trade schools.
FOUR-YEAR UNDERGRADUATE
COLLEGE OR UNIVERSITY
TWO-YEAR UNDERGRADUATE
COLLEGE
TRADE, TECHNICAL, OR
VOCATIONAL SCHOOL
COOPERATIVE LIFE SKILLS
PROGRAMS
CHAPTER 1: AGENCY HELP/LEGAL INFORMATION
ACTIVITY 1-1: Contact Log Sheet ✒
AGENCY/ORGANIZATION CONTACT INFORMATION*
* Name of individual you spoke with, address, phone number, and e-mail.
DATE NOTES FOLLOWUP INFORMATION
  15
CHAPTER 1: AGENCY HELP/LEGAL INFORMATION
DATE NOTES FOLLOWUP INFORMATION
✒ ACTIVITY 1-1: Contact Log Sheet
16   
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
2
TRANSITION
PLAN
Transition planning allows you, your autistic child, and their school system to begin planning
for the road to graduation and beyond. The planning process introduces you and your young
adult to services, activities, instruction, and support designed to provide them with the skills
necessary to succeed post-high school. An effective transition plan includes both short- and
long-term goals as identified by the student, identifies the necessary supports, and is specific to
the interests, abilities, and desires of your child.
While this process may seem overwhelming and even scary, starting early will allow you to take
smaller, more manageable steps and help you and your child reach your goals successfully and,
ideally, with less stress. This chapter outlines the key steps of the process, the overarching goals
of transition planning, and how to create a successful transition plan that takes into consider-
ation all of your young adult’s strengths and plans for the future. (Remember, individual states
may have slightly different processes and rules for transition planning, so be sure to refer to
your state’s requirements.)
The information from the transition plan will become part of your child’s IEP, although it may
be developed as a separate document called an Individualized Transition Plan (ITP). In either
case, it may include information on such areas as:
▶ Vocational training and job sampling (similar to on-the-job training)
▶ Employment goals and a timeline for achieving them
▶ Goals in support of residential opportunities, including independent living
▶ Community participation goals, including social and leisure skills, travel training, pur-
chasing skills, and personal care, to name a few
▶ Goals relevant to postsecondary education (college), when appropriate
▶ Coordination with state and private adult services agencies and providers
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
Planning to Plan – Reflecting on and Gathering Information to Build Your Child’s Transition Plan
18   
Long-term transition planning is an ongoing process that reflects the continuing development
and changing needs of your child. You will work closely with your autistic child and the transi-
tion planning team at their school to create this guiding plan of action.
 
PLANNING TO PLAN – REFLECTING ON AND GATHERING INFORMATION TO BUILD
YOUR CHILD’S TRANSITION PLAN
Start small, but think big! Before you begin the actual paperwork and planning with your young
adult’s school and IEP team to implement the transition plan, you can start planning on your
own to lay a foundation for the entire process. This section outlines a three-step process to:
1. Facilitate thinking and brainstorming about your young adult’s future (Assessment)
2. Begin planning future goals (Goal Writing)
3. Understand realistic challenges to these plans (Anticipating Obstacles)
Various activity worksheets, located at the end of this chapter and referenced throughout, will
help you with this process.
Step One: Assessment
As you begin the transition planning process, think about the “big picture” of your young
adult’s future:
▶ What do you want your child’s life to look like 5 years, 10 years, or 20 years from now?
▶ What do you NOT want your child’s life to look like in 5 years, 10 years, or 20 years
from now?
▶ What will your child need in order to achieve the desired goals and avoid the undesired
outcomes?
As a parent of an autistic child, you may have struggled to adjust your expectations for the
future you once dreamed of for your child. Realistic, concrete goals and expectations are the
foundation of a successful transition plan. It is important not only to set progressive goals that
your child can reach, but also to challenge your child to grow. Leave room to be pleasantly sur-
prised by all that they can achieve through this process! Transition doesn’t only apply to your
loved one. It also applies to you – the parent. Parents have to be ready to allow their loved one
to grow and learn through experiences, failures, and successes.
Involve your autistic child in the planning process as much as possible. Person-centered
planning not only empowers the individual, but also creates a more productive and effective
transition plan in the long run.
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
Planning to Plan – Reflecting on and Gathering Information to Build Your Child’s Transition Plan   19
Throughout this discussion (often called “futures planning”), the concept of future quality
of life is central. “Quality of life” basically refers to how satisfied your child feels about their
education, work, recreation, spiritual life, social connections, community living, health, and
emotional well-being. You may not have specific ideas about all of these areas, but you can
start imagining what you would like for your young adult and what they would like for them-
selves as they transition out of high school. At different times in this process, you will begin
to find connections among all of these areas and start to identify realistic and attainable goals.
Although quality of life is often as much about the process as it is about the product, neither
process nor product should be compromised as part of transition planning. Once you have this
broad vision in mind, start brainstorming about some of the specifics, such as personal inter-
ests, strengths and challenges, past learning history, and the supports that will be necessary for
your child along the way. These elements constitute the starting point of the transition plan
and will be discussed further below.
Two popular planning protocols include Making Action Plans (MAPS) and Planning Alter-
native Tomorrows with Hope (PATH). MAPS is a five-step process designed to help students,
parents, and education teams plan for the future. The process results in discovering who the
student is, their strengths and needs, where they want to go in life, and the steps they need to
take to get there. See Activity 2-1: Making Action Plans (MAPs) (on page 29) to start this
process.
 
For more information about MAPs, see https://www.transitioncoalition.org/wp-content/
originalSiteAssets/files/docs/makingdreamshappen1258858219.pdf.
PATH is another creative planning tool for the future that allows students, parents, and
educators to explore their vision for the future and make an action plan to get there. The six
steps to PATH are:
1. Create a clear picture or vision of where you want to be.
2. Identify your goals – focus for the next year.
3. Ground yourself in the now.
4. Identify people to enroll on the journey.
5. Recognize ways to build strength.
6. Chart action steps needed to achieve your goal.
 For more information, see https://pcp.sonoranucedd.fcm.arizona.edu/resources/person-
centered-planning-tools/path.
■ Personal Interests
As with any adolescent, your autistic young adult may have strong – very strong in some cases
– personal interests and hobbies. These preferences may be discovered by observing what makes
your child happy, what they do during downtime, or what items or activities motivate them.
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
Planning to Plan – Reflecting on and Gathering Information to Build Your Child’s Transition Plan
20   
In addition, asking yourself or your young adult (as the central figure in this process) questions
can form another jumping off point for considering future educational and vocational options.
Activity 3-1: Questions About Personal Interests in Chapter 3 (on page 47) provides a good
starting point.
Systematically answering these questions will allow you to begin to see the connections between
what your teen is good at and interested in now, and what they can do in the future. Everyone,
including you, is more able and willing to work and excel at something that they like to do, and
your autistic young adult is no exception. Tailoring transition planning to your child’s personal
interests in a realistic, albeit ambitious, manner while suggesting clear and meaningful steps
toward achieving their goals will help keep your child focused and engaged.
You, your young adult, and the rest of the transition team can work together to complete the
worksheet in Activity 2-2: My Dreams for the Future (on page 30) to document your child’s
personal interests and explore their connections to the transition goals.
■ Strengths (Capabilities) and Weaknesses (Challenges)
You are well aware by now that there are areas of your child’s life that they do better in and other
areas that are more challenging. It is important to list all of their strengths and challenges, and
then to look at them with a new eye. Consider these strengths and challenges in Activity 2-3:
Examining Strengths and Challenges (on page 31).
Patterns of behavior previously considered to be potential challenges may actually help in the
workplace – attention to detail may be especially valued in a quality assurance position, and
punctuality is valued in any workplace. If your young adult is overly interested in sci-fi movies,
is there a way in which this interest can be translated into a strength? If so, how?
Take a look at how your autistic young adult’s specific capabilities and challenges can be turned
into assets in the workplace or school, as illustrated in the following.
MARKETING CHARACTERISTICS AS EMPLOYMENT STRENGTHS
Characteristics Employment Strength
Nonverbal May be less likely to verbally disrupt coworkers
Limited social interest May stay more focused on work and not waste time
Strong sensory preferences May enjoy working in a quiet office
Is very schedule- or rule-
bound
Comes to work on time, takes breaks at the right time,
and returns from break on time
Appears ritualistic or compul-
sive
May offer excellent attention to detail and quality
control
From Holmes, A., & Douglas, J. (2005). Meeting the needs of adults with autism. Paper presented at the
ASA National Conference, Nashville, TN.
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
Planning to Plan – Reflecting on and Gathering Information to Build Your Child’s Transition Plan   21
■ Past Learning History
Building from your child’s strengths and challenges, it is useful to think about areas in which
they have succeeded or been challenged in the past. The topics in Activity 2-4: Building on Ex-
perience (on page 32) may help in discovering those areas.
Previous experiences, whether good or bad, are sources of valuable information relevant to the
transition planning process as they can illuminate areas where your young adult is more likely
to succeed or areas that are more challenging and, therefore, should be avoided if possible.
Aside from the learning value, previous work experience, coupled with comprehensive, com-
munity-based instruction, makes it more likely that it will be easier for your young adult to
access and maintain employment in the future. If your child has not had any work experience,
consider looking for opportunities now, early on in the transition process. If actual work expe-
riences are not a possibility, you may want to consider finding volunteer opportunities for your
young adult in an area of interest to them, as this too can provide information on challenges,
strengths, and weaknesses across a variety of tasks and environments. At first glance, finding
such opportunities may not appear easy. However, by networking with friends, other parents,
your employer, the businesses you frequent (e.g., local shops), and community services (e.g.,
houses of worship), and searching online, you will probably find a variety of opportunities
just waiting to be discovered. (Chapter 4 includes additional information on employment.)
■ Support Structure
Throughout the life of your autistic child, an important support network of teachers, counsel-
ors, friends, family, and others has evolved. This support structure will continue to be impor-
tant to both you and your young adult through the transition period and across new environ-
ments. However, because social relationships can be challenging for many autistic individuals,
this area requires some closer consideration and attention. Use Activity 2-5: Your Support Net-
work (on page 33) to brainstorm.
Step Two: Writing Overarching Goals
Later in the transition process, you will be asked to help determine – and write down – specific
objectives you want your young adult to achieve. But now is the time to think of the broad,
overarching goals that reflect the future you want for your young adult. You can think of this
as a mission statement for the transition you envision.
EXAMPLES OF OVERARCHING GOALS
■ My child will be able to live indepen-
dently.
■ My child will be comfortable and safe
in a supported living situation.
■ My child will have two or three close
relationships.
■ My child will contribute to the community.
■ My child will find satisfaction in several
of their daily activities.
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
Planning to Plan – Reflecting on and Gathering Information to Build Your Child’s Transition Plan
22   
These overarching goals should build from the information you gathered in the previous assess-
ment regarding quality of life, personal interests, strengths and challenges, and past experience.
Activity 2-6: Documenting Overarching Goals for Transition (on page 37) is a worksheet that
you can complete together with your young adult to prioritize and articulate broad goals for
career, education, living, relationships, recreation, health, and community. These goals will
become more structured – with specific tasks and objectives – as you work together to create
the transition plan.
Step Three: Anticipating Obstacles
Most goals are not meant to be easy to accomplish and meet in a short amount of time. But
goals can be broken into smaller steps that can gradually be achieved, one at a time.
As you think of the skills, lessons, materials, and information you and your young adult need
in order to move through the transition process successfully, obstacles may present themselves.
For instance, as you created the list of goals for your young adult, did you think of any skills
that they may need to be successful? Or resources that will help them accomplish these
skills? Lack of any key “ingredient” may delay, if not stall, the transition process. So, if certain
skills need development, such as effective communication, toileting, table manners, cell phone
use, or personal hygiene, now is the time to create a strategy to develop them.
Other obstacles may appear along the way, but you are building a solid plan that can be re-
vised and modified to accommodate the changing needs, desires, and skills of your young adult.
“My goals for my daughter are for her to be happy in whatever she does and to find some
personal fulfillment and satisfaction. I believe her goals are the same. She needs to be and
wants to be productive, wants to have a sense of independence.”
− Mother of a 21-year-old autistic daughter
“He loves work. He is very dependable. He will show up on time, finish work ahead of time, and
his work ethic is great. But when he wakes up in the morning, he may not take a shower or
brush his teeth. These are the things that we must work on with him.”
− Mother of a 24-year-old autistic son
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
The Transition Plan   23
THE TRANSITION PLAN
Characteristics of a Sound Transition Plan
IDEA specifies that transition planning is a coordinated set of activities for a student with a
disability that is:
▶ Outcome-oriented – a process with clear goals and measurable outcomes
▶ Student-centered – based on the specific skills that the student needs andreflective of
the student’s interests and preferences
▶ Broad-based – including instruction and related services, community experiences,
development of employment and post-school living objectives, and acquisition of daily
living skills and vocational evaluation
▶ A working document – outlining current and future goals, along with the specific
strategies for achieving these goals, and changes over time
What the Plan Should Include
Your child’s transition plan will be customized based on their needs. In particular, a solid tran-
sition plan will include many of the following elements:
▶ Assessment of your child’s needs, interests, and abilities
▶ Statement of preferences for education, employment, and adult living
▶ Steps to be taken to support achievement of these goals
▶ Specific methods and resources to meet these goals, including accommodations, ser-
vices, and/or skills related to the transition goals
▶ Instruction on academic, vocational, and living skills
▶ Identification of community experiences and skills related to future goals
▶ Exploration of service organizations or agencies that provide services and support
▶ Methods for evaluating success of transition activities (e.g., a video portfolio)
Additional Logistical Information in the Plan
In addition to stating the goals for your young adult, the transition plan should include logisti-
cal information on how the plan will be implemented and monitored, such as:
▶ A timeline for achieving goals
▶ Identification of people or agencies to help reach these goals
▶ Clarification of how roles will be coordinated
▶ A plan for identifying post-graduation services and supports and obtaining the neces-
sary funding
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
The Transition Plan
24   
Handout 2-1: Sample IEP Transition Plan (on page 34) offers an example.
Measurable Goals Allow You to Evaluate Success
Ideally, all of the above goals should be measurable to ensure you have a precise way to deter-
mine when the goals have been reached.
Another way of describing strong IEP goals is using the acronym SMART. SMART goals are:
S –	 Specific – the goal is specific in naming the skill that will be targeted and the desired
result.
M – Measurable – the goal is stated in such a way that progress can be measured.
A – Attainable – the goal represents reasonable progress for your child.
R – Results-Oriented – the goal clearly lays out what will be done to accomplish it.
T – Time-Bound – the goal includes a timeline by which the child will achieve it.
See examples of SMART goals in Handout 2-2: Example SMART Goals (on page 36).
Who Is Involved
THE TRANSITION PLANNING TEAM
Key Members
■ You and your autistic child and
interested family members
■ Your young adult’s transition
coordinator
■ Your young adult’s general
education teachers, when applicable
■ Your young adult’s special
education teachers
■ DVR or ADD representative
■ Administrators
■ Psychologists
■ Speech and language pathologists
■ Other related service providers
EXAMPLE OF A MEASURABLE TRANSITION GOAL
Overarching goal: The student will have an appropriate work environment post-high school.
Measurable goal: Together with the school guidance counselor, transition coordinator, or
vocational rehabilitation counselor, the student will explore options for employment post-high
school. The student will complete a vocational assessment and participate in a minimum of
one unpaid internship, volunteer experience, or after-school job in an area of interest over the
next 6 months. This participation is defined as a minimum of 5 hours/week for no less than
12 weeks. This will help the student determine further needs for vocational training.
››
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
The Transition Plan   25
Optional and Helpful Team Members
■ Advocacy organization representative
■ Business education partnership repre-
sentative
■ Guidance counselor, when appropriate
■ Residential services representative, when
appropriate
■ Mental health agency representative
■ Postsecondary education representative,
when applicable
Transition planning should help you and your young adult connect with the adult service
system. Representatives from adult services organizations that may provide or pay for post-
transition services must be invited to participate in the development of the IEP transition plan.
If they are unable to attend, the school must find alternative ways of involving them in
planning any transition services they might pay for or provide. It is important that each transi-
tion activity include someone who consents to monitor the provision of that service as outlined
in the IEP.
Guidance counselors, related service providers, vocational rehabilitation counselors, and ad-
ministrators all have a potential voice in designing transition plans for students. The specific
roles of participants may vary, depending on the goals and needs of your young adult.
There is one major difference between transition planning and the IEP meetings you may be
used to – your autistic young adult must be actively involved! The next chapter, Student-
Centered Transition Planning, will assist you in preparing your young adult for the process so
that it is as fruitful and stress-free as possible.
Your Role as a Parent
As a parent, you play a critical role in the development of the transition plan. Specifically, you
will need to:
▶  
Be your child’s primary advocate in the absence of their ability to do so, with an
emphasis on fading their dependency to allow ongoing growth to the best of their abil-
ity
▶ Provide unique and personal information about your child that is not otherwise
reflected in the school’s or agency’s records
▶ Ensure the transition plan is meaningful, practical, and useful for your child
▶ Monitor transition planning in the IEP to ensure agreed-upon activities are imple-
mented; frequent communication with your child and other IEP team members will
help keep the plan a working document
▶ Promote your young adult’s independence, self-advocacy, and decision-making
▶ Plan for future financial and support needs, such as guardianship, estate planning, Sup-
plemental Security Income (SSI), and related work incentives, along with other sources
of financial support (Center for Autism Research (CAR, 2014)).
››
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
Implementing and Monitoring the Transition Plan
26   
The IEP team relies on your knowledge of your young adult. Effective transition planning
adopts an approach that is sensitive to the culture and context of the family, thus empowering
your family’s role in guiding your autistic learner.
 
For more on advocacy, see OAR’s Life Journey Through Autism: Navigating the Special Education
System at https://www.researchautism.org/resources.
Families must be notified ahead of time when an IEP meeting includes development of a tran-
sition plan. Special education case managers often identify the purpose of the meeting and can
provide draft goals ahead of the meeting, if requested.
IMPLEMENTING AND MONITORING THE TRANSITION PLAN
You will work with the transition team during a series of meetings to develop a comprehensive
transition plan for your young adult. During the process, it is important to record important
details at all planning meetings. Once the actual plan is completed by the team, it is a living,
evolving document that should be reviewed and updated several times a year to ensure it con-
tinues to reflect and meet all of your young adult’s needs and that adequate progress is being
made to that end. Each team member is responsible for implementing the specific transition
tasks, together with your autistic young adult.
By creating a document with outcome-oriented goals that can be measured, you can more
efficiently and effectively monitor your young adult’s progress. It is important to work with
the transition planning team to periodically update this plan as your child continues through
school to ensure a successful transition to adulthood.
What to Do If You Don’t Agree With the Transition Services Provided by the School
Hopefully, the transition process will be a smooth, collaborative effort among all team mem-
bers supporting your young adult. Nonetheless, it is important to know your rights as a parent
if you cannot come to an agreement with the school regarding your child’s education:
▶ You have the right to ask for an impartial due process hearing. A hearing may be
held on anymatter related to the identification, evaluation, or placement of your child
or the provision of a “free appropriate public education” (FAPE). Hearings are to be
held by either the State Department of Education or the school personnel directly
responsible for your child’s education. To obtain a hearing, make a written request to
the person who is responsible for the education program your young adult attends.
▶ If you believe your child’s educational rights are being violated by non-implemen-
tation of the IEP, make a written request to the person who is responsible for the edu-
cation program your child attends or your state’s Department of Education.
IDEA affords parents procedural safeguards if agreement cannot be reached regarding
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
Resources   27
the identification, evaluation, educational placement, or FAPE for their child. If you
do not feel appropriate transition services are being provided, you may exercise your
rights as explained in the Procedural Safeguards for Children and Parents, which can be
obtained from your state or local districts. Professionals and volunteer advocates who
know how to navigate the special education system can help you ensure your child’s
rights are being enforced.
 
For more information, see OAR’s Life Journey Through Autism: Navigating the Special Education
System at https://www.researchautism.org/resources.
Early Planning Leads to Success
Planning for your autistic young adult’s future and exploring the world of postsecondary edu-
cation or employment can seem daunting or even a distant prospect. However, starting to plan
early and building goals related to particular life skills, postsecondary education, or employ-
ment into your young adult’s transition plan/IEP breaks the process into manageable steps and
helps engage an accessible, ongoing support system of transition team members.
The chapters that follow review important information related to the transition process and will
help you maximize your planning:
▶ Student-Centered Transition Planning
▶ Postsecondary Education
▶ Vocation and Employment
▶ Life Skills
As you read this information, remember that you are your young adult’s best advocate for their
future. Tailoring the approach to your young adult’s specific needs will lead to success.
RESOURCES
▶ Autism Self Advocacy Network & Family Network on Disabilities. (n.d.). Roadmap to transition:
A handbook for autistic youth transitioning to adulthood. http://autisticadvocacy.org/wp-content/
uploads/2016/11/Roadmap-to-Transition-A-Handbook-for-Autistic-Youth-Transitioning-
to-Adulthood.pdf
▶ Center for Autism Research (CAR) at the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia. (2014). Turning
18: Options for when your child needs decision-making help. https://www.carautismroadmap.org/
turning-18-options-for-when-your-child-needs-decision-making-help/?print=pdf
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
Resources
28   
▶ OCALI. (n.d.). Evolving postsecondary goals. https://www.ocali.org/project/transition-plan-
ning-and-the-iep/page/examples-of-evolving-postsecondary-goals
▶ OCALI. (n.d.). Transition to adulthood guidelines. https://www.ocali.org/project/transition_to_
adulthood_guidelines
▶ The UNC Center on Secondary Education for Students with Autism Spectrum Disorder: https://
csesa.fpg.unc.edu/families/supporting-transition
▶ The VCU Autism Center of Excellence: https://vcuautismcenter.org/resources/adolescence.
cfm
KEY POINTS – CHAPTER 2
Starting the transition planning early helps to create more manageable steps
to achieve goals.
Your autistic child’s Individualized Transition Plan will become part of their IEP.
Work together with your autistic young adult to brainstorm future dreams
and goals.
A transition plan is outcome-oriented, measurable, student-centered, and
adaptable.
Chapter 2: Handouts/Activities 
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
ACTIVITY 2-1: Making Action Plans (MAPs) ✏
History
h How would you describe your life up to now?
h What people have been important in your life?
h What has happened to you so far that is important to you?
Dreams
h What are your hopes and dreams for the future?
h What would you like to do this year?
h What would you like to do after high school?
Fears
h What do you not want to have happen in your life?
h What worries you most about your future?
h What do you think will stand in the way of you getting what you want?
Who Is
h Who are you?
h What are your: strengths, gifts, talents, likes, dislikes, and skills?
h What do you like to do?
h Who are your friends?
Needs
h What is needed for the dreams that you listed to come true?
h What would make your life better?
h Who could help you with your plans for the future?
h What can other people do to help you meet your needs?
Adapted from Furney, K. S., Carlson, N., Salembier, G., Cravedi-Cheng, L., & Blow, S. (n.d.). Making dreams
happen: How to facilitate the MAPS process. Transition Coalition. https://www.transitioncoalition.org/
wp-content/originalSiteAssets/files/docs/makingdreamshappen1258858219.pdf
  29
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
✏ ACTIVITY 2-2: My Dreams for the Future
First, write your dream for the future in the center circle labeled “My Dream for the
Future” (do this independently or with a parent). Then, fill in the information in the
outer circles. List as many ideas as you can come up with. Then, in each outer circle,
put a box around what you think are the most important ideas. Draw a line into the
center “Dream” circle, making a web of things that will help you achieve your goal.
As a final step, write any­
thing else you think you need in the outer circle around your
“Dream” circle. Revisit this web of strengths in the future so you can keep track of
your progress.
My Interests





My Accomplishments







My Dream
for the Future






Things
Needed to Get
There






How I Prefer
to Communicate
with Others






My Strengths
(at school, home,
work)






30   
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
ACTIVITY 2-3: Examining Strengths and Challenges ✒













What are the ways in which my
child’s strengths and challenges may
benefit them as they transition
beyond high school?













To what extent do my child’s
challenges impact their ability
to reach their goals beyond
high school?













How can my child’s challenges
actually be strengths in the
workplace?













How can I help my child
capitalize on their strengths
to reach their goals beyond
high school?
  31
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
✒ ACTIVITY 2-4: Building on Experience
What was successful
for my child?
What was unsuccessful
for my child?
Areas of instruction
(school subjects,
extracurriculars)
Teacher-student
interactions
Environmental
conditions
Accommodations
in school
Accommodations in
the community
Structured vs.
unstructured
situations
Previous work
experiences
32   
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
ACTIVITY 2-5: Your Support Network ✒
Consider who or what groups in your community can support your young adult in the
following areas. Remember that the school supports your child is receiving now will
not be available after graduation.
Exercise/Recreation




Religion/Spirituality





Daily Chores
(grocery shopping,
laundry, etc.)






Friendships/Socializing/
Romantic Relationships





Health & Wellness






Transportation
& Housing






Name:


  33
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
✒ HANDOUT 2-1: Sample IEP Transition Plan
Student Name: Ophelia DOB: 1/11/05 School Name: Epitome HS
Grade: 10							 IEP Meeting Date: 3/21/21
IEP Meeting Participants & Roles
Participants involved in the development of the IEP Transition Plan and
the placement decision:
Participant Name					Role
Ms. Smith							 Parent/guardian
Ophelia							Student
Ms. Parker							GE teacher
Mr. Miller							 District representative/LEA
Ms. Ryan							Special education teacher
Student’s Measurable Postsecondary Goals
1. Education/Vocational Training:
After graduation, Ophelia will attend a two-year community college
course and gain qualifications in culinary arts.
2. Employment:
After high school, Ophelia will continue her part-time job at a local res-
taurant and receive an increase in hourly pay as she completes restau-
rant courses.
3. Independent Living/Community Participation:
Ophelia will join a horseback riding group for young adults and partici-
pate at least twice a month.
4. Adult Services:
a.  
Ophelia will work with her job coach once per month on communicat-
ing her restaurant performance and goals with her boss.
b. Ophelia will take the city bus to her job.
5. Other:
Student’s Present Levels of Academic Achievement and
Functional Performance (PLAAFP)
Description: This is a summary of assessments that identify the student’s
current strengths, preferences, interests, and areas of need. It describes
how the student’s disability impacts their academic progress and participa-
tion in school activities. The summary includes the student’s performance
34   
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
and academic achievement levels (in reading, writing, math, science, social
studies, etc.), as well as the student’s functional performance levels (self-de-
termination, social skills, communication, behavior, etc.). The student’s desired
postsecondary goals should be reflected in this section and throughout the
other components of the IEP Transition Plan.
Measurable Annual Goals, Short-Term Objectives/Benchmarks,
and Progress Report
Annual Measurable Goal #1:
Ophelia will practice taking the bus at least three times per month.
Does this goal align with a measurable post-secondary goal? Yes. If so, which
one? 4b.
Measurable Benchmarks/Short-Term Objectives Beginning Date
Obtain bus pass, bus schedule, and map
Review bus schedule and map
Take a bus trip to work with job coach with verbal prompting
Take a bus trip to work with job coach with no verbal prompting
1/15
1/15
1/31
2/28
Progress: How will progress toward this annual goal be measured? Documen-
tation of student progress tracker.
Report: How and when will progress toward this annual goal be reported to
the student’s parent? How frequently? Email summary of progress at the end of
each session.
Summary of Transition Services
Supporting
IEP Goal
Transition Services/
Activities
Amount/
Frequency
Begin/
End Dates
Responsible Person/
Location
List of Accommodations and Modifications
Accommodations/modifications:
Additional supports for school personnel to meet the unique needs of the
student (training, equipment, etc.):
HANDOUT 2-1: Sample IEP Transition Plan ✒
  35
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
✒ HANDOUT 2-2: Example SMART Goals
SMART
GOALS
WHAT THAT
MEANS
NON-EXAMPLE EXAMPLE
Specific
Be clear and speci-
fic about the area
targeted for impro-
vement, such as
by including speci-
fic skills or subject
areas.
Michael will be able
to comprehend
reading materials.
Michael will
demonstrate rea-
ding comprehen-
sion of grade-level
text by creating
story maps, gra-
phic organizers, or
retelling passages
with 80% accura-
cy during 4 out of 5
tries.
Measurable
The goal is stated
in a way that the
student’s progress
can be observed
and concretely tra-
cked over time.
Jackson will be able
to read faster.
Jackson will be able
to orally read a
third-grade passa-
ge at 90-110 words
read correctly per
minute by the end
of the academic
year.
Attainable
The goal sets a
higher bar that is
realistic and achie-
vable compared to
the student’s pre-
sent level of perfor-
mance.
Using her porta-
ble communica-
tion device, Tatyana
will select a prefer-
red activity from an
array of 2-4 sym-
bols 100% of the
time.
Using her porta-
ble communica-
tion device, Tatyana
will select a prefer-
red toy, activity, or
snack from an array
of 2-4 symbols 80%
of the time.
Results-
Oriented
The goal sta-
tes clearly laid
outcomes, levels
of performance, or
deliverables.
Theo will work on
employment acti-
vities.
Theo will create a
personal resume,
have it reviewed
by Mrs. Garcia, and
send the polished
resume to 3 poten-
tial job prospects.
Time-Bound
The goal includes a
timeframe for when
the student will
achieve it, such as
shorter-term bench-
marks or annual
goals.
Alex will read fourth
grade material at
80-100 wpm with
1-3 errors.
By March 30, Alex
will read fourth
grade material at
80-100 wpm with
1-3 errors.
36   
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
ACTIVITY 2-6: Documenting Overarching Goals for Transition ✏
As you plan for your child’s transition to adulthood, this worksheet may be useful as
you brainstorm together on goals for their future. Have your child circle the bold-
faced goals that seem realistic and are of interest to both of you, and then complete
the statements that follow the goals you have circled.
In 5 years, I see myself in or completing college.
To attend college, I need to …



In 5 years, I see myself working as a … 
To obtain this position, I need to …



In 5 years, I see myself enjoying …



To do these things, I need to …



In 5 years, I see myself practicing my faith/spirituality by …



To practice my faith/spirituality, I need to …



  37
CHAPTER 2: TRANSITION PLAN
✏ ACTIVITY 2-6: Documenting Overarching Goals for Transition
In 5 years, I see myself in the following relationships:



To make or keep these relationships, I need to …



In 5 years, I see myself (in my community) …



To be a part of my community, I need to …



In 5 years, I see myself (to stay healthy) …



To be able to do these things, I need to …



In 5 years, I see myself living …



To live there, I need to …



38   
CHAPTER 3: STUDENT-CENTERED TRANSITION PLANNING
3
STUDENT-CENTERED
TRANSITION PLANNING
Student-centered planning, also called “person-centered planning,” is an approach to transition
planning that prioritizes the interests and aspirations of the individual student. Specifically, the
focus is on helping students develop the tools and skills necessary to design their own goals
for their career, education, living situation, and other aspects of adult life. The team builds
the transition plan around the student’s goals by equipping the student with the tools and re-
sources needed to reach those goals.
Student-centered planning involves students meaningfully in all aspects of the transition pro-
cess and helps them develop the skills they need to live an independent life once they no longer
have an IEP and transition team to support and guide them. In addition to helping the team
create purposeful and specific plans for their life after graduation, your young adult’s in-
volvement in the transition planning process also provides them with an excellent oppor-
tunity to advocate for themselves.
SELF-DETERMINATION SKILLS
In order to be an active participant in the transition planning process, your autistic teen needs
to develop self-determination skills – the skills that enable individuals to speak up for what
they want, what they’re interested in, and how they would like to accomplish it. Self-determi-
nation skills also allow individuals to have a strong understanding of their strengths and weak-
nesses, feel in control of their own lives, make important decisions, and figure out creative so-
lutions to problems.
To be an active participant in the transition planning process, your autistic young adult, to the
best of their ability, should be able to:
▶ Communicate their preferences
▶ Make choices based on individual preferences
CHAPTER 3: STUDENT-CENTERED TRANSITION PLANNING
Centering the Student in Transition Planning
40   
▶ Set goals or help choose relevant goals
▶ Identify and solve problems that may arise
▶ Advocate for themselves
These skills can be built into the transition plan as behavioral goals, since it may take time to
be able to accomplish them. Every one of these skills that your child develops will help make
them become a more active participant in the transition planning process. If your school is
reluctant to include these goals as early as you have suggested, consider embedding the same
goals in other categories in your child’s current IEP (e.g., adaptive, social, and behavior). See
Handout 3-1: Preparing for the Transition Planning Meeting (on page 45).
School transition teams may not be aware of the benefits of student-centered planning or even
the current laws that mandate student participation in the transition planning process, so it
is important to discuss this approach with the IEP team. Your child has a right to participate
in this process; under IDEA, students with disabilities must be invited to transition planning
meetings. Additionally, research shows that developing the self-determination skills that are
emphasized in student-centered planning results in better outcomes in academics, independent
living, and employment for students with disabilities (Shogren et al., 2015). Finally, students
become more motivated to meet their IEP goals if they have a say in defining them and under-
stand why they are important.
CENTERING THE STUDENT IN TRANSITION PLANNING
Below are some ways that you and your transition team can foster self-determination skills and
student-centered planning:
▶ Educate your autistic young adult – Helping your young adult understand how
having autism may impact them will help them educate others, advocate for them-
selves, and build a realistic transition plan:
▷ Discuss in concrete terms the impact of your young adult’s autism symptoms on
their education, job choices, and independent living status.
▷ Explore in concrete ways what strengths they bring to the table.
▷ Start these discussions early, and be sure to focus on your young adult’s strengths,
as well as challenges and ways in which these challenges might be minimized.
▷ Encourage your child to connect with the larger autism community. Participation
in both online and in-person social groups for autistic people can help show your
young adult that they are not alone and give them an opportunity to get advice
from people who have already been through what they’re going through now.
CHAPTER 3: STUDENT-CENTERED TRANSITION PLANNING
Centering the Student in Transition Planning   41
▶ Help your autistic young adult to understand the results of their assessments –
Reviewing the results of your young adult’s assessments with them will help them get
a better sense of their strengths, weaknesses, and interests:
▷ Discuss the results of your young adult’s transition assessments with them and
encourage them to make suggestions for further assessments or supports needed.
▷ Ask your young adult about their own evaluation of their qualities and encour-
age the transition team to use interview-style assessments that focus on your child’s
goals.
▷ Ask for formal assessments, known as interest inventories or strengths assessments,
that not only identify skill sets but also connect them to potential job consider-
ations.
▷ Collaborate on possible IEP goals with your young adult – what supports are they
interested in having and how would they address their areas for improvement?
▷ Follow up with your young adult as new assessments are conducted, explaining
the progress that they have made towards their goals.
▶ Allow your autistic young adult to define their own goals to the extent possible –
Guiding your child through this process ensures that they are in control of their future
and helps them develop a sense of agency and control – feeling empowered to act on
their own behalf.
▷ Your child may require help in determining how to choose goals and in identifying
their interests and strengths across specific areas. Use Activity 3-1: Questions About
Personal Interests (on page 47), Activity 3-2: Developing Self-Advocacy Skills (on
page 48), and Activity 3-3: Goal Plan (on page 50) to brainstorm about their
interests and their goals for the future.
▷ Allow your young adult’s interests, not just their strengths, to guide the transi-
tion plan. Although it is tempting to orient towards the things they’re best at, those
might not be the areas that they’re the most interested in. Work with your young
adult and the transition team to design realistic goals around their interests and help
them build the skills necessary to reach them. See Activity 3-1: Questions About
Personal Interests (on page 47) for sample questions to help your young adult iden-
tify their interests.
▷ Help your child develop their goals further by exposing them to new experiences.
If possible, find opportunities for them to shadow or intern with individuals in
their desired careers.
▷ The Department of Vocational Rehabilitation is required to fund Pre-Employment
Transition Services (Pre-ETS) for students with disabilities. These services include
training, job and college counseling, work-based learning experiences, and self-
advocacy instruction. All of these can be valuable tools in narrowing down your
CHAPTER 3: STUDENT-CENTERED TRANSITION PLANNING
Centering the Student in Transition Planning
42   
child’s career interests and equipping them with necessary skills and experience.
Reach out to your local DVR to see what kinds of services are available in your area.
More information may be found at https://workopportunities.net/employment-
services/vr-preets/.
▶ Encourage your young adult to advocate for themselves and their needs in social
and educational situations.
▷ Instead of being limited by options that the transition team offers, you and your
child can present the team with what you think is possible.
▷ The worksheet in Activity 3-2: Developing Self-Advocacy Skills (on page 48), as
well as many of the resources at the end of this chapter, can be a useful tool to get
your young adult thinking about self-advocacy. Whenever possible, encourage them
to speak for themselves and complete tasks independently.
▶ Involve your autistic young adult in IEP/ITP meetings – Meaningfully including
them in these meetings is an essential aspect of student-centered planning:
▷ Some autistic students want to lead the meetings directly; others just want to be
in the room. Tailor your young adult’s level of participation to whatever suits their
skills and comfort. For example, some students may want to present a PowerPoint
or play a pre-recorded video message where they discuss their goals. Encourage your
child to participate in meetings as early as possible.
▷ Request that the other members of the IEP team speak directly to your young adult
when they are present, rather than speaking about them as though they aren’t in the
room.
▷ Explain the general purpose of the planning process and its impact. If this is the
first time your young adult has been involved in this planning process, they may
never have seen the IEP document. Walk them through the documentation that
will be referenced during the meeting and help them get acquainted with their
rights as a student.
▷ Make sure your child has plenty of time to prepare and ask questions, and to
provide the necessary accommodations to do so.
▷ Discuss what will happen at the meeting in advance to minimize surprise and
anxiety.
▷ Your young adult may also need some direction with regard to the social rules for
participating in these meetings. Review the agenda for the meeting and make sure
If your autistic young adult cannot or does not want to participate in transition planning
meetings, IDEA regulations expect schools to take other steps to make sure that the student’s
preferences are taken into account.
CHAPTER 3: STUDENT-CENTERED TRANSITION PLANNING
Self-Determination Tips by Learning Style   43
your young adult knows who will be present and their respective roles. Encourage
them to listen carefully to the other members of the transition team and to speak up
with their opinions to the extent that they are comfortable.
SELF-DETERMINATION TIPS BY LEARNING STYLE
For young learners:
▶ Include your child in IEP meetings as early as possible, even if only for a brief intro-
duction. Providing your child with a favorite snack at the meeting can help them
become interested in attending.
▶ Prompt your child by giving them simple choices, such as asking them which home-
work assignment they would prefer to work on first, to help them become familiar
with the process of decision-making.
▶ Encourage your child to keep track of their time and tasks using a planner or calendar.
For visual learners:
▶ Draw a map and pictorial representations of where your young adult is now, what their
goals are, and what is needed to reach those goals. This may be done as a spider web of
connected ideas or a timeline with connecting boxes.
▶ Have your child assist you in drawing pictures or cutting and pasting photos on the
computer of them participating in their favorite activities.
For verbal learners:
▶ Brainstorm together to identify and make a list of strengths.
▶ Create a list of activities or skills your child generally needs assistance with and the
accommodations most likely to be effective and available.
For nonverbal learners:
▶ Consider using photographs or videos of different activities to assess their interest or
observe individual reactions.
▶ Provide actual opportunities for your child to experience different community/voca-
tional options to assess interest or observe individual reactions.
▶ Provide a sufficient level of exposure to these activities so that the assessments are based
on a reasonable sample of experience.
CHAPTER 3: STUDENT-CENTERED TRANSITION PLANNING
Resources
44   
Activity 3-4: Self-Determination Checklist Student Self-Assessment (on page 51) may be a
use-ful starting point. Also, your young adult may like to complete Activity 3-5: Your Person-
Cen-tered Planning Meeting (on page 52) prior to any meeting.
RESOURCES
▶ Autism Self Advocacy Network. (2016). Roadmap to transition: A handbook for autistic youth tran-
sitioning to adulthood. https://www.autisticadvocacy.org/bbook/roadmap/
▶ Beach Center on Disability – https://www.beachcenter.lsi.ku.edu
▶ Cornell Person-Centered Planning Education Site – https://www.personcenteredplanning.org
▶ I’m Determined – https://www.imdetermined.org
▶ Institute for Community Inclusion – https://www.communityinclusion.org
▶ Iris Center online training module on Secondary Transition: Student-Centered Transition Plan-
ning – https://www.iris.peabody.vanderbilt.edu/module/tran-scp
▶ National Gateway to Self Determination – https://www.ngsd.org
▶ O’Brien, J., Pearpoint, J., & Kahn, L. (2015). The PATH & MAPS handbook: Person-centered
ways to build community. Inclusion Press.
▶ Paradiz, V. (2009). The integrated self-advocacy ISA curriculum. Autism Asperger Publishing Co.
▶ Shogren, K. A., Wehmeyer, M. L., Palmer, S. B., Forber-Pratt, A. J., Little, T. J., & Lopez, S.
(2015). Causal agency theory: Reconceptualizing a functional model of self-determination. Edu-
cation and Training in Autism and Developmental Disabilities, 50(3), 251–263.
KEY POINTS – CHAPTER 3
There are many ways you, your transition team, and your autistic young adult can
prepare for transition planning together.
Student-centered planning, or person-centered planning, is an approach to tran-
sition planning that prioritizes the interests and aspirations of the autistic
individual.
Encourage your child to develop self-determination skills and participate in
the transition planning process early on, such as by setting goals or advocating
for themselves.
Chapter 3: Handouts/Activities 
CHAPTER 3: STUDENT-CENTERED TRANSITION PLANNING
HANDOUT 3-1: Preparing for the Transition Planning Meeting ✒
You can prepare for your young adult’s transition planning meeting in many ways.
The lists below highlight some activities to complete ahead of time and materials to
bring with you to the meeting.
DO AHEAD OF TIME
Prepare documentation:
Prepare questions for the team; list in order of priority.
Complete Activity 3-3: Goal Plan or create a document with the goals you and
your child have for their future.
Prepare a preliminary list of services you think may be appropriate.
Review background information:
Review your child’s previous IEPs.
Review the results of any assessments done since the last IEP meeting.
Review your rights and the laws related to transition planning.
Determine logistics − attendees and location:
Find out who will be attending the meeting.
Invite additional participants (any individuals you think may be helpful, includ-
ing advocates or representatives from service agencies).
Confirm meeting time and location.
Prepare with your young adult:
Discuss the meeting with your child, addressing their questions and how they
can be involved at the meeting.
Review the background information with your child.
Practice any skills your child may need help with.
Prepare a PowerPoint presentation/video message (optional) that your child
can share about their interests and goals.
Set goals and have a strategy:
List what you want to have accomplished by the end of the meeting.
  45
CHAPTER 3: STUDENT-CENTERED TRANSITION PLANNING
BRING TO THE MEETING
List of questions.
Activity 3-3: Goal Plan or goals for your child.
Notebook and pen.
Recording device (find out if you need permission from the school to record the
meeting).
Any recent assessments or reports on your child that may be useful.
Any articles or other research that may help the team understand your child’s
needs better.
Copy of the latest IEP document.
PowerPoint presentation and/or other prepared materials.
✒ HANDOUT 3-1: Preparing for the Transition Planning Meeting
46   
CHAPTER 3: STUDENT-CENTERED TRANSITION PLANNING
ACTIVITY 3-1: Questions About Personal Interests ✏




































What kind of support do you
need to achieve your goals
after graduation?
Does your current skill set
match the demands of the
activities or environments you
want to access?
Are there certain topics,
activities, or environmental
conditions that you do not like
or cannot tolerate?
What are your hopes and fears
about the transition process?
What are your strengths or
talents (academic or
nonacademic)?
Are there certain topics or
activities of particular interest
to you?
  47
CHAPTER 3: STUDENT-CENTERED TRANSITION PLANNING
✏ ACTIVITY 3-2: Developing Self-Advocacy Skills
Self-Advocacy – Help yourself to get the resources you need to succeed.
Tip #1: Have a support system. You may have a trusted teacher, a friend, or a parent who can help
you. Brainstorm ideas with them, practice your advocacy skills, and ask them to accompany you to
provide support during the process.
Practice: List two people who can help you with this process. Write down why they are good choices
for help.
Tip #2: Know yourself and what you need. Think about the things you have used in the past to be
successful. Then you can explain not only WHAT you need, but WHY you need it!
Practice: Make a list of the services you have received in the past that have been especially helpful.
Tip #3: Know your rights under ADA, IDEA, and Section 504. Review Handout 1-1: Comparison of ADA,
IDEA, and Section 504 Legislation if you need a refresher.
Practice: Write down one of the most important protections YOU think ADA or Section 504 offers you.
Tip #4: Be relaxed. In most situations where you must advocate for yourself, there is nothing to be
nervous about; you are entitled to certain services under the law. Stay calm and take your time.
Practice: To help feel more confident, complete this statement and say it to yourself if you need to feel
more comfortable asking for certain services: “It is my right to receive 
to succeed.”
Tip #5: Be prepared. Make a list of things you want to say and ask for. This will help to keep you on
track as you meet with the appropriate people. Also, be sure to write down any questions you may have.
Practice: Pretend you are calling a college admissions office. Write down three questions you would
like to ask the admissions staff about the accommodations commonly offered at the school.
48   
CHAPTER 3: STUDENT-CENTERED TRANSITION PLANNING
Tip #6: Present specific and clear ideas, feelings, and thoughts. Be specific about what you want or
need in the situation. It’s okay to be direct and upfront.
Practice: Your professor has scheduled a test. You would like accommodations for taking the test in
a different way. In three sentences or less, write what you would tell that professor.



Tip #7: Use “I” statements. You want to be clear that the opinions or needs you express are your own.
Practice: “I believe I need extra time to take tests in this class because …”
Write an “I” statement of your own here:



Tip #8: Ask for feedback from the person you are speaking to. It is important to make sure that they
understand what you are saying and that you understand their point of view.
Practice: Think about the last time you had a miscommunication with a fellow student or instructor.
What feedback from them could have prevented the miscommunication? Write your ideas here:



Tip #9: Educate others. You are an expert on how autism impacts your life. Use your knowledge and
skills to educate others about you and what you need.
Practice: Pretend you just met someone for the first time. They ask you to explain what autism is and
how it affects your life. Explain to them in three sentences:



ACTIVITY 3-2: Developing Self-Advocacy Skills ✏
  49
CHAPTER 3: STUDENT-CENTERED TRANSITION PLANNING
✏ ACTIVITY 3-3: Goal Plan
Copyright©2008 Commonwealth of Virginia Department of Education Training and Technical Assistance
Centers – I’m Determined Project.
Student
Name:
Date:
My
Goal:
Outcomes:
Next
Steps
to
Reach
My
Goal:
People
Who
Can
Support
Me
to
Reach
My
Goal:
50   
CHAPTER 3: STUDENT-CENTERED TRANSITION PLANNING
ACTIVITY 3-4: Self-Determination Checklist ✏
Student Self-Assessment
Student Name: Date:
Self-determination skills help you to know …
▶ yourself
▶ your goals
▶ the supports you need to reach your goals
Use the following scale to rate the statements below:
3 = almost always/most of the time 2 = sometimes 1 = rarely or never
Rating
3 2 1
I set goals to get what I want or need.
I make plans for reaching my goals.
I check my progress on how I am doing toward my goals.
I attend my IEP meetings.
I participate in my IEP meetings.
I know the goals listed in my IEP.
At school, educators listen to me when I talk about what I want or need.
At home, my parents listen to me when I talk about what I want or need.
I have others in my life who help me to accomplish my goals.
I ask for help when I need it.
I know what I need, what I like, and what I enjoy doing.
I tell others what I need, what I like, and what I enjoy doing.
I help to make choices about the supports (educational services) and
accommodations that I need in school.
I can describe my learning difficulties to others.
I believe I have control to direct my life.
I take care of my personal needs (clothes, chores, meals, grooming).
I make friends with others my age.
I make good choices.
I believe that working hard in school will help me to get a good job.
Copyright©2008 Commonwealth of Virginia Department of Education Training and Technical Assistance
Centers – I’m Determined Project.
  51
CHAPTER 3: STUDENT-CENTERED TRANSITION PLANNING
✏ ACTIVITY 3-5: Your Person-Centered Planning Meeting
Review the steps to leading your meeting in the table below. Check which steps you
want to do and which steps you want others to perform for you at your meeting.
Action:
I will
do this:
Write the name of the person
you will ask to help you with this step:
A. Introduce yourself.
B.  
Ask everyone to introduce
themselves.
C.  
Review past goals by sharing
what goal(s) you worked on
during the last year.
D.  
Ask for feedback. Ask what
others think about your goals.
E.  
Listen to what your team
members say.
F.  
Tell the team what jobs you like.
G.  
Tell the team what goals you
have.
H.  
Ask the team for how they can
help you with your goals.
I.  
Ask questions when you don’t
understand.
J.  
Thank everyone for coming to
your meeting.
K.  
Work on your goals every day.
Copyright©2020 Employment First, https://www.ohioemploymentfirst.org/.
52   
CHAPTER 4: VOCATION AND EMPLOYMENT
4
VOCATION
AND EMPLOYMENT
Finding and maintaining a job requires a variety of key life skills – communication, social,
presentation, technology – to name a few. Right now, a career is down the line for your young
adult, but they are already preparing for success on the job, including practicing these skills
at home (often the first workplace!).
The Individualized Transition Plan (ITP) discussed in Chapter 2 may include goals for em-
ployment, preparing now for a potential job, and for a future one. IDEA requires that schools
support students with disabilities to make the transition from school to work. To that end,
goals, clear steps, and attainable outcomes can be built into the transition plan. The transition
period will help autistic learners develop skills for entering the workforce, and will be guided
by their interests, goals, and desires for the future. Building skills and preparing for first jobs
and experiences are the first steps to long-term employment.
TRANSITION PLANNING
Your Young Adult’s Role
Like any good student-centered transition plan, this process involves your child leading the
way, to the best of their ability, regarding their interests, preferences, and goals for employment.
They will:
▶ Identify interests and skills needed for employment
▶ Develop and enhance life skills to reach employment goals
▶ Participate in the transition planning process
▶ Take the lead in searching for and finding employment
CHAPTER 4: VOCATION AND EMPLOYMENT
Your Role as a Parent
▶ Advocate for your student to gain employment skills in the transition planning
process
▶ Monitor transition planning for employment-related skills
▶ Promote and encourage your young adult’s self-determination and independence
▶ Find opportunities for your child to practice employment-related skills at home,
such as time management, technology skills, teamwork
PLANNING SEQUENCE – STARTING EARLY
Starting in middle school or early in high school, you and your child should:
▶ Start having conversations about work and jobs. These conversations will tie in well
with your discussions from Chapter 2 about interests, goals, future ideas.
▶ Explore job sampling, job shadowing, informational interviews, and experience
through volunteering. Through such experiences, your child can learn about the wide
variety of jobs and careers that exist, and perhaps gain skills through similar tasks at
home, at school, or in the community. Completing chores or other activities around
the home can build responsibility and work-related skills.
▶ Participate in vocational assessment activities at school or in the community, such as
DVR or a related agency.
▶ Seek opportunities for your child to develop competency in independence, self-moni-
toring, and life skills outside the classroom.
▶ Identify training and skills that will support their needs.
In high school, you, your autistic child, and the transition team should:
▶ Reaffirm and reassess life and work goals related to interests and capabilities.
▶ Break down employment goals into realistic pieces and identify the steps and skills
needed.
▶ Identify strengths and weaknesses relative to work interests and focus on skill develop-
ment for work tasks.
▶ Identify and find tools and resources to support self-regulation, stress manage-
ment, and time management. These skills are important in the workplace and can be
enhanced in high school, with the help of occupational therapists and other service
providers.
Planning Sequence – Starting Early
54   
CHAPTER 4: VOCATION AND EMPLOYMENT
▶ Take advantage of programs that offer opportunities for training and employment
through job sampling, school-to-work, apprenticeships, cooperative education,
tech-prep, mentorships, independent study, and internships.
▶ Assess transportation needs and capacity to get to work.
▶ Discuss effective disclosure strategies for work environments.
▶ Contact DVR, ADD agency, and/or SSA before your child turns 16 to determine
eligibility for services or benefits post-graduation.
THE EVOLVING NATURE OF WORK
The career and employment opportunities available to an autistic individual reflect the breadth
of the entire job market. In addition, the flexibility of some workplaces and the evolving nature
of work can provide additional options that are especially suitable for an autistic young adult.
Where and how people work is ever changing, which opens up different types of opportunities
for autistic individuals, depending on their needs, interests, and job match.
Traditional
A traditional work environment includes jobs that may be part-time or full-time, based on a
40-hour work week. Some jobs are temporary or seasonal, where the length of employment is
based on a specific time period.
Vocational
Vocational work refers to more hands-on or technical jobs, which may include car repair, culinary
arts, graphic design, and many others. Vocational training – a type of organized program that
prepares individuals for paid or unpaid employment – may be a part of transition services.
Check out your state’s VR website to gain more information about core services offered and
services like trial work experience/apprenticeship, assistive technology, benefits analyses, and
other job search costs covered by VR.
Self-Employment
Through self-employment, an individual owns their own business and earns income for them-
selves; income may come through contracts and/or freelance work as part of this business.
The Evolving Nature of Work   55
CHAPTER 4: VOCATION AND EMPLOYMENT
Remote – Telework
Remote work (telework, telecommuting, working from home, flexible workplace, etc.), where
employees can work from anywhere and don’t have to commute or travel to a central place,
office, store, or building, has become much more common in recent years. Different types of
employers and jobs offer unique schedules or opportunities for remote work certain days of the
work week or full-time.
CATEGORIES OF EMPLOYMENT
Competitive
A full-time or part-time job with market wages and responsibilities is considered competitive
employment. Most jobs are considered competitive employment, such as waiting tables,
cutting grass, fixing cars, teaching, computer programming, and even writing guidebooks on
transitions!
Supported
In supported employment, autistic individuals work in competitive jobs alongside neurotypi-
cal individuals and receive support services while on the job. Supported employment may also
include career assessments, job training, job development skills, and job coaching. Support
services vary by state and may be short-term in nature. Supported employment is often found
at universities, hotels, restaurants, office buildings, or small businesses.
Supported employment may be funded through state developmental disabilities or vocational
rehabilitation agencies, but families need to ensure that: (a) supported employment, by defini-
tion and statute, is intended for people with severe disabilities; and (b) autistic individuals can,
in fact, work if given the proper support, training, and attention to job-match characteristics.
If ineligible for state-funded services, some supported employment may be paid for privately.
Secured or Segregated
In secured or segregated employment, individuals with disabilities (not necessarily autism-
specific) work in a self-contained unit and are not integrated with non-disabled workers. This
type of employment is generally supported by a combination of federal and/or state funds.
While competitive and supported employment are ideal vocational options for many autistic
individuals, secured or segregated employment may be the only viable option for those with
higher support needs, and is preferable to no employment.
Categories of Employment
56   
CHAPTER 4: VOCATION AND EMPLOYMENT
Competitive Supported Secured/Segregated
■ Fully integrated into
general workforce
■ Requires special skills
■ Natural supports and
consequences
■ Employment supports
offered as needed
■ Community integration
■ Ongoing job support
■ Wages and benefits
■ Place first, then train
■ Personalized, flexible
supports in place
■ Built-in safety net
■ Group learning
■ Basic skills building
■ Minimal compensation
or unpaid
■ Behavioral supports
Preparing to Work
Like many young people, some autistic individuals are excited to get a job. Perhaps they want
to earn some extra money to buy items they want, or to learn more about a particular area that
they really like. Others may feel more comfortable just staying home and not want to become
part of the workforce. Getting to the “why,” or the intention behind working, can be an im-
portant part of the process for your young adult and also a helpful personal motivator. Do they:
▶ Want to learn more about a particular topic?
▶ Enjoy working on a particular job or task?
▶ Want opportunities to contribute to a group effort?
▶ Want to enhance social opportunities?
▶ Want to begin a component of adult life?
You may find that your young adult’s intention may be a combination of these factors or none
of these (they may not want to work!). Working together on future goals and wishes, and dis-
cussing how work may fit in could be a starting point. Chapter 2 offers some activities to brain-
storm and work on together.
Beyond intention are the necessary skills – life, social, communication, and job skills – that will
help your young adult thrive in the workforce. The section “Ensuring Success on the Job” be-
low dives into more detail on specific skills that autistic individuals may build as they prepare
for employment.
Finding a Job
The first job may not be “the job” for life. First jobs are great for gaining experience and learn-
ing new skills. This is the place to start – finding a first or even a second job – with your autistic
young adult, where they can practice skills, get experience, and keep growing in the workforce.
Categories of Employment   57
CHAPTER 4: VOCATION AND EMPLOYMENT
When starting to look for a job, it is helpful to facilitate a conversation with your loved one and
their support team on questions such as the following.
▶ How many hours can your child work at any given time?
▶ When are they available? Evenings, weekends, weekdays?
▶ What type of work environments should they try to avoid?
▶ What type of support is needed for your child to succeed in the workplace? (Job coach,
written instructions, etc.)*
▶ What types of work or industry appeal to your learner?
▶ How will they get to and from the work site?
As your autistic young adult searches for jobs, they need to consider the match between them-
selves and a particular job. The “job match” refers to the extent a particular job meets an in-
dividual’s needs in terms of challenge, skills, interest, comfort, camaraderie, status, hours, pay,
and benefits. Generally, as people move through the job market over time, they develop more
skills and get closer and closer to their ideal job match.
Autistic individuals are motivated to work with a correlation to the extent they enjoy the work
and are treated with the same respect as neurotypical coworkers. While money may not be a
motivation, they do still appreciate receiving a paycheck for their efforts. A good job match is
of critical importance in these cases. When considering things that contribute to job match,
they can be classified into physical and social components.
PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL JOB MATCH COMPONENTS
Physical Job Match Components Social Job Match Components
■ Hours of employment
■ Acceptable noise levels at job
■ Pay, leave, other benefits
■ Acceptable activity levels
■ Physical requirements of the job
■ Acceptable margin of error (quality
control)
■ Production requirements
■ Acceptable level of interaction with
coworkers and supervisors
■ Clear job expectations
■ Grooming and hygiene requirements
■ Demands on communication skills
■ Personal space available
■ Opportunities for food/snacks
■ Coworker training and support
■ Community status
Another possibility when looking for work is to explore neurodiversity initiatives. Some em-
ployers have specific autism at work programs, although these tend to fit individuals with
high skills in technology or specific college degrees. While jobs, availability, and companies
may change over time and availability differs throughout the country, for some autistic young
adults, exploring neurodiversity recruitment programs may be an option.
* Work and school accommodations may be different. Parents may consider conversations with the school team and/or DVR
representative to elaborate on accommodations that may be successful in the workplace.
Categories of Employment
58   
CHAPTER 4: VOCATION AND EMPLOYMENT
JOB SEARCH
The job search can seem like a job itself! Remember, there are a wealth of resources to support
the job search, many aimed at helping autistic individuals. Inquiring among agencies that
address supported employment, agencies that support people with special needs, friends,
family, colleagues, and acquaintances may be the best first job search strategy.
Online job search strategies may include job boards advertising job openings, virtual job fairs,
company websites, and social media (like LinkedIn). Other methods include in-person visits
to stores/locations, in-person career fairs, or employment/staffing agencies. Allow your young
adult to explore and practice different ways of searching for a job.
The job search and application process includes many parts, which can be practiced and
prepared for before and during the process. These parts include:
▶ Finding appropriate jobs
▶ Applying to jobs
▶ Crafting resumes and cover letters
▶ Preparing for interviews and interviewing (developing scripts for practice can help)
▶ Following up with companies after submitting applications and interviews
The job search takes effort, persistence, and patience. Most likely, there will be rejections and
setbacks. There are a lot of skills involved, and building these skills can be worked into a
transition plan for greater success. Handout 4-1: Job Possibilities (on page 65) includes some
job ideas.
ENSURING SUCCESS ON THE JOB
Personal Disclosure
When considering a possible job or employment in general, it is important to consider when
and if your autistic young adult will disclose their diagnosis. If they have had assistance se-
curing the job and are receiving job coaching, the primary question is not whether or not to
disclose, but rather what information is relevant for disclosure and to whom. Remember, in
all cases, disclosure is a personal choice, and there is no law obligating anyone to disclose that
they have a disability. However, to be eligible for accommodations under ADA, some level of
disclosure is necessary. Handout 4-2: When (and If!) to Disclose (on page 67) provides infor-
mation on timing options for disclosure, helping you and your young adult to think through
the positives and negatives about disclosing at various stages in the job search process. There is
no one correct answer for when to disclose; however, once disclosed, that information legally
must be kept confidential by the employer.
Job Search   59
CHAPTER 4: VOCATION AND EMPLOYMENT
Some questions for your young adult to consider when thinking about disclosure include:
▶ What is the intention behind disclosing? For informational purposes, to create aware-
ness, or to ask for accommodations?
▶ What supports and accommodations would you benefit from in the workplace?
▶ Do you feel comfortable telling your boss or coworkers?
▶ For which aspects of the job might you benefit from your supervisor’s help in develop-
ing strategies? Do you need to disclose in order to ask for this?
Accommodations on the Job
According to ADA, a qualified employee or applicant with a disability is someone who can per-
form, with or without reasonable accommodation, the essential functions of the job in ques-
tion. Reasonable accommodation may include, but is not limited to:
▶ Making existing facilities used by employees readily accessible to and usable bypersons
with disabilities
▶ Restructuring or modifying work schedules
▶ Acquiring or modifying equipment or devices; adjusting/modifying examinations,
training materials, or policies; and providing qualified readers or interpreters
An employer is required to make an accommodation to the known disability of a qualified ap-
plicant or employee if it would not impose an undue hardship on the operation of the employ-
er’s business. “Undue hardship” is defined in ADA as “an action requiring significant difficulty
or expense when considered in light of factors such as an employer’s size, financial resources,
and the nature and structure of its operation.”
Reasonable accommodations under ADA can include longer training periods, written lists of
tasks to complete and the time of day they are to be completed, and making sure there are no
seriously distracting sights and sounds in the work area. For a more complete list of reasonable
accommodations specific to autism, see Handout 4-3: Reasonable and Common Job Accommo-
dations (on page 70).
Educating Employers and Coworkers
If your autistic adult decides to disclose their autism, they should be prepared to help the em-
ployer, supervisors, and possibly coworkers better understand autism and how it affects them
relative to the workplace (i.e., training, performance, and assimilation/social interaction). It
may be helpful for employers and coworkers to receive formal training about autism so that
they can better understand and offer support when necessary. Ideally, the autistic employee
Ensuring Success on the Job
60   
CHAPTER 4: VOCATION AND EMPLOYMENT
and the employer should cooperatively brainstorm and develop such training. The autistic
employee could participate in a staff-wide discussion, for example, to help dispel myths about
autism and share the strengths, experiences, and areas of support that are specific to them.
Workplace-Specific Social Skills
Although social skills may not be necessary for your young adult to perform the actual job, they
may be needed to help them keep the job or be more socially included at work. The social skills
demanded vary from place to place, but there are basic skills that every employee should know.
The following sections provide an overview of the areas where your autistic young adult may need
assistance or training to perform the job.
■ Personal Presentation
As an employee, your young adult will represent the company they work for. People make judg-
ments about an individual based on appearance. Therefore, it is important to present oneself
appropriately and professionally. Aspects of personal presentation include:
▶ Age- and job-appropriate clothing and footwear
▶ General cleanliness and good hygiene
▶ Grooming of hair, teeth, and nails
▶ Interpersonal greetings ranging from someone saying “hello” to high fives, fist or elbow
bumps, and initiating an introduction
■ Communication Skills
Some autistic individuals have trouble effectively communicating their wants, needs, likes, or dis-
likes to others. Scripts can be developed to practice typical work social situations. As such, instruc-
tion in the following communication skill sets may help:
▶ Expressing preferences or likes
▶ Ordering one’s lunch
▶ Excusing oneself to use the restroom
▶ When, and with whom, it might be appropriate to start a conversation
▶ Listening skills
▶ Obtaining help when necessary
▶ Level of response to others
▶ Eye contact during regular interaction
▶ Voice volume, tone, and tempo
Ensuring Success on the Job   61
CHAPTER 4: VOCATION AND EMPLOYMENT
■ Social Behaviors
Social behaviors, by definition, are particularly challenging for autistic individuals. Complicat-
ing this issue is the belief among many employers that social competence on the job (e.g., be-
ing a team player) is as important as production competence. Therefore, some areas of social
competence that should be covered in your transition plan include:
▶ General manners, including responding to greetings, not interrupting others, etc.
▶ Table manners, particularly if one wants to be socially included with colleagues during
lunch
▶ Awareness of others’ personal space across all work environments
▶ Understanding private behavior as being different from public behavior
▶ Recognizing when assistance is needed and obtaining it
▶ Tolerance of unusual sounds, actions, behavior of others, and changes in schedule of
activities
▶ Social rules regarding the appropriate touching of others
▶ What to do during breaks
▶ What to talk about and what not to talk about at work (confidentiality)
REINFORCING SUCCESS – SUPPORTING THE NEW EMPLOYEE
Considering, searching, applying, and getting a job requires a tremendous amount of effort,
but the process can lend itself to incredible skill-building and independence. As with all parts
of the transition planning process, your young adult should take center stage as the main ad-
vocate, decision-maker, and planner, according to their needs, skills, and desires. They can and
should take great pride, as will you, in each step along the way to becoming an employee!
RESOURCES
▶ Disability: IN (neurodiversity initiatives): https://www.disabilityin.org/what-we-do/commit-
tees/autism-at-work-roundtable/
▶ Grandin, T., & Duffy, K. (2008). Developing talents: Careers for individuals with Asperger syn-
drome and high-functioning autism. Autism Asperger Publishing Co.
▶ Hire Autism: https://www.hireautism.org/
▶ Job Accommodation Network: https://www.askjan.org/
▶ National Collaborative on Workforce and Disability: http://www.ncwd-youth.info/
Reinforcing Success – Supporting the New Employee
62   
CHAPTER 4: VOCATION AND EMPLOYMENT
▶ OCALI. (n.d.). The employee with autism spectrum disorder. https://www.ocali.org/project/em-
ployee_with_asd
▶ Office of Disability Employment Policy: https://www.dol.gov/agencies/odep
▶ Virginia Commonwealth University. (n.d.). Workplace readiness toolkit. https://www.centeron-
transition.org/transition/employment/workplacereadinessskills.html
KEY POINTS – CHAPTER 4
Employment skills can start being developed as early as middle school, and can
be built into the transition planning process.
Your autistic young adult should lead the way in searching for and finding
employment.
Many job search options and resources are available to support an autistic
individual in finding a job.
A wide range of employment options, settings, and formats are suitable for
autistic individuals.
Workplace-specific social skills can be practiced, and employers can also be edu-
cated about creating and maintaining workplace environments that contribute to
an autistic individual’s success.
Chapter 4: Handouts/Activities 
Resources   63
CHAPTER 4: VOCATION AND EMPLOYMENT
HANDOUT 4-1: Job Possibilities ✒
JOB IDEAS FOR AUTISTIC INDIVIDUALS WHO NEED MORE SUPPORT
Reshelving library books – Memorizing numbering system and shelf locations
Factory assembly work – Especially if the environment is quiet
Copy shop – Running photocopiers; printing jobs could be lined up by somebody else
Janitor jobs – Cleaning floors, toilets, windows, and offices
Restocking shelves – Available in many types of stores
Recycling plant – Sorting jobs
Warehouse – Loading trucks, stacking boxes
Lawn and garden work – Mowing lawns and landscaping work
Data entry – Office work or research assistance
Fast-food restaurant – Cleaning and cooking jobs with lower demands on short-term memory
Plant care – Watering plants in a large office building
JOB IDEAS FOR AUTISTIC INDIVIDUALS WHO REQUIRE LESS SUPPORT
Autistic individuals tend to be specialized in how they think. There are three common types
of thinking styles: (a) visual thinking or thinking in pictures; (b) music and higher math; and
(c) nonvisual, verbal thinkers.
Jobs That Match the Talents of Visual Thinkers
Architectural and engineering drafter Theater lighting director
Auto mechanic Jewelry maker and other crafts
Photographer Industrial automation programmer
Machine maintenance technician Web designer
Animal trainer Landscape designer
Computer troubleshooter Veterinary technician
Graphic artist Biology teacher
  65
CHAPTER 4: VOCATION AND EMPLOYMENT
Jobs That Match the Talents of Nonvisual Thinkers and Verbal Thinkers
Journalist Stocks and bonds analyst
Budget analyst Book indexer
Translator Copyeditor
Bookkeeper and record keeper Speech therapist
Librarian Accountant
Special education teacher Inventory control specialist
Jobs That Match the Talents of Music and Math Thinkers
Computer programmer Electronics technician
Math teacher Musician/composer
Engineer Music teacher
Chemist Statistician
Physicist Scientific researcher
Adapted from Grandin, T., & Duffy, K. (2008). Developing talents: Careers for individuals with Asperger
Syndrome and high-functioning autism. Autism Asperger Publishing Co.
✒ HANDOUT 4-1: Job Possibilities
66   
CHAPTER 4: VOCATION AND EMPLOYMENT
HANDOUT 4-2: When (and If!) to Disclose ✒
WHEN TO DISCLOSE
On-the-Job Application/Cover Letter
Pros Cons Other Considerations
■ Allows applicant to
relax about employer
possibly finding out.
■ Enables the employer
to decide if autism is a
concern.
■ May exclude your child
before having a chan-
ce to present themsel-
ves and demonstrate
strengths and capabi-
lities.
■ No way of knowing if
hiring was based on
diagnosis.
■ Immediate disclosure
may make finding a job
more difficult; however,
when your child does
find employment, they
are less likely to have
autism-related prob-
lems on the job.
At the Interview
Pros Cons Other Considerations
■ Offers the opportuni-
ty to answer any questi-
ons about autism and its
impact on the job.
■ Allows applicant to
request accommoda-
tions for the interview.
■ Discrimination is less
likely in person. Can
help the employer make
sense of any observed
autistic characteristics,
potentially reducing fear,
confusion, or misinter-
pretation of these cha-
racteristics.
■ Too much emphasis on
diagnosis may distract
from discussion of your
child’s strengths and
abilities.
■ Your child will need to
be comfortable answe-
ring questions and
leading a discussion
about autism and how
it affects them specifi-
cally.
  67
CHAPTER 4: VOCATION AND EMPLOYMENT
WHEN TO DISCLOSE
After Hired But Before Beginning Work
Pros Cons Other Considerations
■ If the hiring decision is
changed and you are
sure your child’s autism
will not interfere with
their ability to perform
the job, legal action is
warranted.
■ Employer and person-
nel department may
distrust your child and
feel they should have
been told beforehand.
■ Will need to evaluate
your child’s autism to
determine its impact on
the specific job duties
and then be able to
explain specifically that
it will not interfere with
their performance.
After Beginning Work
Pros Cons Other Considerations
■ Your child will have the
chance to prove them-
selves before disclo-
sing.
■ They will be able to dis-
cuss and educate their
peers and supervisors
about autism.
■ Your child may be pro-
tected by law if disclo-
sure affects employ-
ment status but ASD
does not keep them
from performing job
safely.
■ Can help the supervisor
and coworkers make
sense of any observed
autistic characteris-
tics, potentially redu-
cing fear, confusion, or
misinterpretation of
these characteristics.
■ Your child may be anxi-
ous at work.
■ Employer may be upset
that they were not told
sooner.
■ Could lead to disability-
related stereotypes,
discrimination, or bully-
ing from supervisors or
coworkers.
■ It may be harder for
your child to disclose
the longer they wait.
■ Your child needs to
decide to whom to
disclose their diagnosis
(e.g., no one, super­
visors only, supervisors
and close coworkers, or
everyone).
✒ HANDOUT 4-2: When (and If!) to Disclose
68   
CHAPTER 4: VOCATION AND EMPLOYMENT
WHEN TO DISCLOSE
After a Problem
Pros Cons Other Considerations
■ Your child will have
the chance to prove
themselves before
disclosing.
■ Employer may be upset
that they were not told
sooner.
■ Could perpetuate
myths and misunder-
standings about autism.
■ May be difficult to
re-establish trust with
coworkers.
Never
Pros Cons Other Considerations
■ Your child’s employer
cannot provide accom-
modations or respond
to difficulties due to
autism unless they are
aware of the diagnosis.
■ Risk of being fired for
reasons that employ-
er may have been more
understanding about if
they were aware.
■ Could lead to myths
and misunderstandings
about autism.
■ Coworkers may have
been more understan-
ding if they were aware
of your child’s diagnosis.
■ It may be emotionally
stressful for your child
to “mask” part of their
identity at work.
■ As you and your child
become more confi-
dent that performance
will not be hindered by
having an autism, the
issue of disclosure be-
comes less important.
HANDOUT 4-2: When (and If!) to Disclose ✒
  69
CHAPTER 4: VOCATION AND EMPLOYMENT
Training Response Setting
Mentor or job coach
Training on appropriate
workplace behaviors
(e.g., interacting with
customers)
Consistent supervision
by one person
Regular and immediate
feedback on perfor-
mance (positive and
constructive)
Provision of qualified
readers or interpreters
Voice recorder
Written instructions
Headset for telephone
or a speaker phone
Acquisition of new or
modification of existing
equipment
Minimal clutter in the
work environment
Minimal noise in the
work environment (e.g.,
no radios or music) or
permission to use noi-
se-canceling earplugs
Information for
coworkers about autism
Designated desk or
workspace
Alternative lighting for
photosensitivity
Desk organizers
Fidget devices
✒ HANDOUT 4-3: Reasonable and Common Job Accommodations
ADA guarantees that your young adult may request certain accommodations in the
workplace. Other accommodations may be needed, depending on their needs and
where they are working.
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER:
■ How do the employee’s symptoms impact their performance on specific tasks?
■ What reasonable accommodations can be provided to address them?
■ Do the supervisors and coworkers require training?
ACCOMMODATIONS TO CONSIDER:
Presentation Timing and Scheduling
Daily checklists for completing and
prioritizing tasks
Written or verbal reminders
Written or picture instructions next to
machines, such as postage machine,
copier, printer
Pictures or drawings of the assigned task
Templates of forms or documents
Performance feedback presented
visually (charts, diagrams)
Task flow chart
Consistent schedule
Advanced notice of schedule or activity
changes
Timers and watches
Wall calendars and planners
Large tasks broken down into small
steps
Timer or alarm as a reminder
Timelines for completion of task
Assignment of one task at a time
Multiple breaks
70   
CHAPTER 5: POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION
5
POSTSECONDARY
EDUCATION
Working together, you and your autistic young adult will decide the most appropriate post-
secondary goals. Achieving them will always involve the same planning elements: measurable
goals, interim steps, clear desired outcomes, and appropriate supports. With proper prepara-
tion and transition planning, the process can be customized for your young adult, thereby in-
creasing the potential for success. This chapter discusses how to find the right match for your
autistic young adult and how to make sure the process is beneficial for everyone involved.
PREPARING FOR POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION – WHERE TO GO
AND WHAT TO STUDY
If postsecondary education is a goal for your young adult and the schools they are considering
require proficiency tests, such as the SAT or ACT, their transition plan should include prepa-
ratory work for these assessments. They can work with their special education case manager or
guidance counselor to request accommodations when registering for standardized testing.
The transition planning process should help identify your child’s academic strengths to bet-
ter determine a match between their interests and a school. Begin exploring early. Help your
young adult look into potential summer courses at a community college or explore other op-
tions, such as technical or trade schools in your area, to see what is a good fit. Meet and net-
work with current students and attend an information meeting at a local college. The more you
can prepare your young adult for the college environment and experience, the more effective
their transition will be.
Choosing the Right School
Deciding on a postsecondary program is a milestone for all teens, and your autistic young adult
is no exception. Finding the right match is the key to success, and many types of programs are
CHAPTER 5: POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION
available that may accommodate their needs. Consider all the options, set your requirements,
and then narrow the field of candidates. You can use the checklist in Activity 5-1: Comparing
Postsecondary Programs (on page 77) for evaluating colleges as you begin your search. Here are
some general suggestions and things to consider:
▶ Vocational school, community college, technical institute, state school, or a smaller lib-
eral arts school may all be good options, depending on your young adult’s skills and
areas of interest.
▶ Certificate programs may provide good training in an area of interest. These programs
are sometimes less expensive and time-consuming than vocational schools.
▶ Some autistic individuals prefer two-year community colleges to start out because they
can live at home. However, at the end of these two years, they may wish to transfer
to a four-year college. Such a move will require, minimally, some degree of transition
planning to identify and address the potential challenges and stressors associated with
the new educational environment.
▶ If your autistic young adult would benefit from a curriculum that focuses on develop-
ing independent living skills, job skills, and self-determination, consider starting with
a life skills program or autism transition program. You may want to work with a guid-
ance counselor during this process to explore all available options.
▶ You and your young adult may want to visit particular schools and programs and meet
with admissions counselors to gain more detailed information.
▶ Orientation programs at schools or even on the internet provide a lot of detailed infor-
mation to help determine the most appropriate choice for your young adult.
Once you and your child have determined a specific program or university, it is important to
determine what support services they offer. Most, if not all, colleges and universities have a
department that specializes in ensuring compliance with both ADA and Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973. Some colleges offer general disability services, some have autism-
specific services or college support programs, and in some areas, independent agencies provide
support to college students.
Find out what types of disability-related resources colleges offer their students and how to ac-
cess these accommodations. By becoming familiar with the system and the services provided,
your young adult will be better prepared to advocate for themselves, thereby increasing their
chances for success.
SELF-ADVOCACY: A KEY SKILL IN A COLLEGE ENVIRONMENT
Once your young adult is accepted into college, the role of advocate needs to fall less on you
and far more, if not fully, on them. In fact, self-advocacy skills are considered so critical to suc-
Self-Advocacy: A Key Skill in a College Environment
72   
CHAPTER 5: POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION
cess in college that many institutions don’t even have a mechanism by which you, as the par-
ent, can advocate on their behalf. In college, the student is the main advocate. Therefore, it is
essential that your young adult is prepared with self-advocacy skills to help them communicate
their needs to the appropriate person in the appropriate manner. (Public universities generally
have an office of Disability Support Services, which is the best place to begin.)
OAR’s Finding Your Way: A College Guide for Students on the Spectrum is a great resource for
autistic college-bound students: https://www.researchautism.org/how-we-help/self-advocates/
college.
The process of promoting effective self-advocacy starts by reviewing the types and intensities
of services and supports that were useful to your child in high school and explaining how they
might be beneficial in college. Aside from knowing what supports they need, your autistic
young adult must be able to effectively communicate these needs. Certain skills or, more accu-
rately, skill sets, are critical to the process, including:
▶ How, when, and to whom to disclose:
▷  
Much like disclosing one’s autism in the job search and subsequently the workplace,
your college-bound young adult will face similar decisions in the college environ-
ment. Your young adult is an expert on their experience of being autistic and has a
unique opportunity to let others know, to the extent possible and appropriate, what
it is like. This may be especially important when working with professors. In addi-
tion, it is important to understand that disclosure is not an all-or-nothing proposi-
tion. Each individual will need to learn both how and when (or if) to disclose, and
how much information they need to disclose, in what format, and to what end. In
short, disclosure is a much more complex and personal process than simply saying,
“I am autistic.”
▷  
Disclosing to a professor and receiving appropriate accommodations can make the
difference between academic success and failure. Disclosure to peers and classmates,
on the other hand, may be much more selective and have a range of positive and
social ramifications.
▷  
Even autistic young adults with fewer skills and more complex learning or behav-
ioral challenges can effectively and appropriately disclose by (as one example) hand-
ing out preprinted information cards.
▶ A broad understanding of their rights:
▷  
Discuss with your young adult what rights and protections are afforded to them
under IDEA, ADA, and Section 504. Work with them to better define what, in their
particular case, may constitute a “reasonable accommodation” in the college class-
room.
▷  
Discuss the rights of others in their classes, dorms, and related social activities. How
might your young adult best balance out these often competing agendas?
Self-Advocacy: A Key Skill in a College Environment   73
CHAPTER 5: POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION
▷  
Learning to be an effective advocate requires practice. Role-plays, social scripts, and
video modeling may be useful here.
▶ If you don’t ask, you won’t know (Shore, 2004):
▷  
The social world of college is sometimes confusing, even for neurotypicals. A good
advocacy strategy for your young adult, therefore, is to ask a trusted person if they
are confused or if they don’t understand why something is happening or has hap-
pened.
▷  
Finding out as much as possible about “new” situations (e.g., attending a first con-
cert) by asking questions beforehand can effectively reduce laterproblems.
SKILLS ESSENTIAL TO COLLEGE SUCCESS
In addition to self-advocacy skills, your young adult needs to rely on many key skills to succeed
in the college environment, such as organization, time management, and independent living
skills.
▶ Organization and time management: Identify these skills (generally referred to as
“executive function skills”) as goals in your child’s transition plan so there is time to
develop them before college. Knowing how to organize assignments, manage time, set
priorities, and break larger projects down into steps is critical for success in a post­
secondary setting.
▶ Independent living skills: If your young adult is living on their own at college, tasks such
as laundry, money management, cleaning, problem solving, health and wellness, trans-
portation, stress management, etc., will take on a greater relevance than they had in high
school. These skills can be developed before the first day of college with the help
of occupational therapists or other service providers.
Finally, your young adult may encounter social challenges that are magnified in the college en-
vironment. Talk to them about topics such as peer pressure, alcohol and drug use, sexual safety,
social media/cyber safety, and conflict resolution with roommates. For detailed tips on how to
address these issues, refer to the list of books and websites at the end of this chapter.
SETTING UP – AND USING – SUPPORT SERVICES
It is important to keep in mind that the protections once offered by the IEP and the transi-
tion plan will no longer be available as entitlements in a postsecondary setting. Universities do
not have a responsibility to identify students with disabilities or determine what supports they
need. You and your young adult are responsible for seeking out the protections, provided
Skills Essential to College Success
74   
CHAPTER 5: POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION
by Section 504 and ADA, from disability-based discrimination (see Chapter 1). Your young
adult must disclose their disability and prepare the necessary documents in order to request
certain accommodations and services to help them fully participate in classes and other activi-
ties (e.g., extra test-taking time, ability to audio record lectures). Failure to do so blocks your
young adult from receiving accommodations that could make the difference in their college
experience. (Note: While some colleges or universities allow the student to complete a form
designating a parent as the primary advocate, this is not the norm and, in some cases, is not
even appropriate.)
Here are some suggestions for getting the support your young adult needs from their college
(Sicile-Kira, 2006):
▶ Locate an experienced guidance counselor or student services staff member who can
advocate for your young adult throughout their college career. Such support may come
in the form of information about services on campus, introductions to groups on cam-
pus with shared interests, recommendations of professors who may be more willing
than others to provide accommodations, and so on.
▶ Provide the college (professors, counselors, resident assistants, etc.) with information
about autism and how it affects your young adult, specifically challenges they face and
strategies that can be used to assist them. Developing a one-page “fact sheet” about
autism and characteristics specific to your young adult may be helpful.
▶ Be sure your young adult discusses the options for taking exams with their professor at
the start of the semester. Exams may be modified based on your young adult’s particu-
lar needs; for example, professors may provide extended time or make exams untimed.
▶ Suggest that your young adult continue to use the strategies that worked in high
school, such as written schedules, visual aids, recording lectures, and other accommo-
dations.
▶ Explore student organizations on campus that may be of interest to your young adult
(gaming club, recreational sport, etc.). This may be a place where they can make
friends and talk to trusted peers about navigating college life. Some campuses have
clubs led by and run by autistic students. If such a club doesn’t exist, your young adult
may consider starting one.
Further education will open up a whole new realm of possibilities for your young adult’s future.
While it will be tough for you to let them go – probably tougher than for the parent of a neu-
rotypical child – it is important for you to avoid being a hovering parent and let your young
adult have some freedom to explore their new environment. If postsecondary education is a
realistic goal for your autistic young adult, preparation and planning can make this process go
smoothly, and it will help to relieve some of your worries.
Setting Up – and Using – Support Services   75
CHAPTER 5: POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION
RESOURCES
▶ Autism Self Advocacy Network. (2013). Navigating college: A handbook on self-advocacy written
for autistic students from autistic adults. The Autistic Press.
▶ Brown,J.T.etal.(2012).Theparent’sguidetocollegeforstudentsontheautismspectrum.AAPCPublishing.
▶ College Autism Spectrum: https://www.collegeautismspectrum.com/collegeprograms/
▶ Institute for Community Inclusion at the University of Massachusetts Boston. Think College.
https://www.thinkcollege.net
▶ Organization for Autism Research. (n.d.). College central (for autistic young adults): https://www.
bit.ly/OARCollege
▶ Organization for Autism Research. (n.d.). Professor’s guide to Asperger Syndrome. https://www.re-
searchautism.org/resources/understanding-asperger-syndrome-a-professors-guide/
▶ Palmer, A. (2005). Realizing the college dream with autism or Asperger syndrome: A parent’s guide to
student success. Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
▶ Shore, S. (Ed.). (2004). Ask and tell: Self-advocacy and disclosure for people on the autism spectrum.
Autism Asperger Publishing Company.
▶ Sicile-Kira, C. (2006). Adolescents on the autism spectrum: A parent’s guide to the cognitive, social, physi-
cal, and transition needs of teenagers with autism spectrum disorders. The Berkeley Publishing Group.
▶ U.S. Department of Education. (2011). Students with disabilities preparing for postsecondary edu-
cation: Know your rights and responsibilities. https://www.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/transi-
tion.html
KEY POINTS – CHAPTER 5
Transition plans can include preparatory work towards postsecondary education
goals.
Unlike high school, students are responsible for actively advocating for them-
selves in college.
It is essential to practice self-advocacy skills prior to and during postsecondary
education; these skills may include, but are not limited to, determining when, how,
and to whom to disclose and advocating for one’s educational rights.
Other key skills for success in postsecondary education include organization, time
management, and independent living.
Many programs and schools offer autism-specific services or college support
programs that will match your child’s needs.
Chapter 5: Handouts/Activities 
Resources
76   
CHAPTER 5: POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION
ACTIVITY 5-1: Comparing Postsecondary Programs ✒
This worksheet provides a comparison checklist to use when exploring postsecond-
ary education options. Picture your child’s ideal college environment and what would
be needed to meet their specific needs. Then use the checklist when you are re-
searching the different education options.
INSTITUTION
NAME
AND
LOCATION
Four-Year College
Two-Year College
Vocational/Technical
College
Life Skills/Transition
Program
Small Student
Population
Dorm Living Option
Living at Home
Option
Transportation
Options
Part-Time Option for
Taking Classes
Variety of
Course Modes
(online, in-class,
hands-on)
  77
CHAPTER 5: POSTSECONDARY EDUCATION
INSTITUTION
NAME
AND
LOCATION
Student Advisor to
Assist Student in
Planning Course
Selection
Major of Interest
to Student
Career Counseling
Clear Admissions
Requirements
Financial Aid Options
Extra Fee for Special
Education Services
Clear Policies for
Requesting Disability
Services and
Accommodations
Technology
Provided to Assist
Students
Experience with
Autistic Students
Tutoring Available
Interesting
Extracurricular
Activities and
Organizations
✒ ACTIVITY 5-1: Comparing Postsecondary Programs
78   
6
LIFE
SKILLS
Growing up may mean moving away from home, exploring independent living, attending a
postsecondary program, or getting a job. Many skills built during transition planning will ex-
pand and facilitate successful transitions to adulthood. Hand in hand with maintaining a job
and finding a great place to live, technology skills permeate every aspect of daily life. This chap-
ter reviews multiple living arrangement options that may be available for your autistic young
adult, provides guidance on how to create transition plans to establish new routines and struc-
tures, and highlights skills to build on in the transition planning process for fulfilling transi-
tions post-high school.
LIVING ARRANGEMENTS
As awareness of autism has grown over the years, communities have welcomed the need to sup-
port various living arrangements for autistic young adults. Supports now expand from hands-
on assistance to completely independent housing. These housing opportunities continue to be
competitive, often resulting in long waiting lists. Young adults need time to practice and pre-
pare for their transition while they are at home, so it is recommended that all families begin
planning and preparing early.
This section highlights common living arrangements and how they are typically structured, or-
dered from the most independent to the most supportive. Note that this list is not exhaustive
and the details for each arrangement can vary widely in your own community. In this regard,
the Centers for Independent Living are valuable resources that provide additional information
about living arrangements and how to find them in your state (https://acl.gov/programs/cen-
ters-independent-living/list-cils-and-spils).
CHAPTER 6: LIFE SKILLS
▶ Independent Living − This type of arrangement is best suited for young adults who
have learned the critical safety and life skills needed to live on their own without daily
support or supervision. In this arrangement, residents live in a home, apartment, stu-
dio, or other residential space where they have exposure to peers and are responsi-
ble for their own care and residential upkeep. Often, young adults do not transition
immediately to independent living, but gradually move through different levels of sup-
port as they work toward complete, independent housing.
▶ Supervised Living − In a supervised living arrangement, the young adult is expected
to complete their daily life skills and live independently, but have available an adult
family member, caregiver, or paid worker to provide a general level of supervision and
limited hands-on support. Commonly, the young adult may live with their parents,
relatives, or a family friend as a “roommate.” This arrangement helps reduce concerns
of social isolation and provides a safety support in the event of an emergency or other
unexpected event.
▶ Supported Living − Under this arrangement, the young adult lives in a home, apart-
ment, or group home and receives daily, ongoing support from a caregiver or inde-
pendent service provider for check-ins and assistance with daily tasks. For example,
an aide is hired to assist the young adult by helping them wake up on time and get
dressed for work, preparing meals for the day, and cleaning the home. Different types
of supported living include:
▷  
Cooperative Living − This living arrangement is commonly known as a “co-op.”
Similar in the level of support available at a group home, the co-op enables several
families of dependent adults to form a cooperative agreement whereby they share
ownership of the home and support of the adults living there. In addition, families
commonly hire an agency or independent caregiver to provide a variety of support
and independent living skills training to the residents.
▷  
Supervised Apartment Living − This arrangement is similar to a college dorm or
campus. Young adults of various levels of independence and skills live in an apart-
ment complex that is monitored and supported by a housing agency. The agency
provides resident assistants who are responsible for creating social activities, mon-
itoring resident cleanliness, and providing support with resident self-care such as
therapy or training on how to become more independent.
▷  
Supervised Group Home Living − In communities where supervised apartments
are not available, group homes are often more common. In a typical group home,
three to six adults with various living skills support needs live together in a house
that is owned and facilitated by an agency. These homes are often staffed by trained
personal care workers who assist the residents with various aspects of living. Group
homes often provide behavioral health and medical care assistance as well.
CHAPTER 6: LIFE SKILLS
Living Arrangements
80   
▶ Adult Foster Care – In this arrangement, the young adult lives in the home of another
family who is responsible for assisting them with their daily living needs. This type of
arrangement is most commonly used for adults with disabilities who were previously
placed in juvenile foster care and are transitioning into adulthood.
▶ Institutional Care – Institutional care, also known as residential care, includes large
care facilities that provide comprehensive medical and daily living care. Such facili-
ties are able to support young adults who need complete hands-on assistance with their
daily living skills and commonly also need behavioral health and/or medical skilled
care. Residents of these facilities are typically assigned an interdisciplinary team of
physicians, psychiatrists, therapists, nurses, vocational educators, and daily care staff to
support their needs through a treatment plan.
PREPARING EARLY
While the physical transition to a new living environment will not occur until your child has
at least finished high school, preparation for that transition can start much earlier. As autistic
individuals generally require more time to learn life skills, it is recommended that key personal
care and daily living skills be introduced no later than the early teenage years. Regardless of
when your child begins the preparation process, a range of key skills will help foster indepen-
dence and success. The following provides a general list of recommended skills to teach. These
should be individualized and tailored to your youth’s abilities and needs.
Life Skills
Life skills, also known as “daily living skills” or “activities of daily living,” include a range of
tasks people use on a daily basis, such as maintaining proper hygiene or cooking a meal. How
well your young adult develops these critical life skills by the time they are ready to transition
to adulthood will help determine the type of living arrangement they will thrive best in. For
example, individuals who need hands-on support to use the toilet, bathe, or dress themselves
on a daily basis will likely start with a group home as opposed to living in a less supportive en-
vironment such as supervised living.
Because we are all unique, there is not a specific list of life skills all individuals should learn.
Handout 6-1: Life Skills (on page 87) provides a suggested list of life skills organized by
category. Consider early on the potential living arrangement your young adult may transition
into, then build a list of skills they will need to succeed in that environment. Remember that
to perform an entire skill independently, your young adult may require the aid of useful tools
such as visual schedules or reminders.
CHAPTER 6: LIFE SKILLS
Preparing Early   81
Functional Skills
So-called functional skills refer to skills we all need to navigate the daily mechanics of living
independently, regardless of living arrangement. The nature of these skills varies even more
widely than daily living skills, and may include household maintenance, money management,
shopping, or other tasks that your child may not need to learn yet.
Harnessing the power of technology, including responsible use and engagement, is another func-
tional skill. Technology skills infuse modern-day life and benefit individuals in many areas, such
as household tasks (like ordering groceries), job searches, social connections, and paying bills.
It is important to teach skills that are meaningful for both your young adult and your family
as you support your child in becoming as independent as possible. In that regard, it is helpful
to keep in mind that some functional skills, like driving, may take more time, resources, and
support than others. Handout 6-2: Functional Skills (on page 88) includes a list of functional
skills as well as tips for teaching them.
■ Time Management
While many autistic youth thrive on structure, they often have difficulty staying organized and
managing their time effectively. From picture-based visual schedules to smart systems on handheld
devices, many tools are available to help organize time more effectively and efficiently. Here are
some recommendations to support your young adult’s success:
▶ Break each day up into smaller schedules: To make the day appear less overwhelm-
ing, organize the day’s events into blocks of time, and break those out into smaller
tasks. For example, the first block in the day, “Morning Routine,” would include
smaller tasks such as “Wake Up,” “Get Dressed,” “Brush Teeth,” “Apply Deodorant,”
and so on. This strategy can help make the day’s events feel achievable, reduce anxiety,
and lead to success.
▶ Create an individualized activity schedule: When living independently, there are
many tasks that do not have to be done on an assigned day but should be completed
weekly, such as household chores. This ambiguity in a schedule can be confusing. To
address this, first create a weekly to-do list of tasks to be accomplished by the end of
the week. Then, on the daily schedule, allocate enough time to complete two tasks
from the to-do list. Your young adult then has the autonomy to select what tasks to
complete each day from the list of weekly chores while ensuring that everything gets
done by the end of the week.
▶ Use an organizer: Electric or paper planners are an excellent way to organize ongo-
ing responsibilities. Organizers can be divided into tabs or sections so that the individ-
ual tasks are grouped according to categories. Using a planner also provides the consis-
tency and predictability of having not only a place for organizing and keeping together
a list of tasks to be completed but also a place for retaining important information
such as your youth’s address or emergency contacts for a quick reference.
CHAPTER 6: LIFE SKILLS
Preparing Early
82   
Health and Safety Skills
In addition to daily and functional living skills, it is important to prepare your young adult
with the skills necessary to maintain their health and safety. Certain skills, such as respond-
ing appropriately to a fire alarm, may need ongoing practice to ensure they are retained over
time. Handout 6-3: Health and Safety Skills (on page 90) provides a basic list of health and
safety skills.
Despite its enormous benefits, technology presents additional safety issues, including cyber-
bullying, access to inappropriate content, and identity theft. Technology education is therefore
important, including education on planning and prevention skills for online safety.
It is critical that your young adult acquires the necessary skills with the ultimate goal of being
able to perform them consistently independently. The AASPIRE Healthcare Toolkit for Adults
on the Autism Spectrum (https://www.autismandhealth.org/) offers worksheets and strate-
gies to help your young adult begin to manage their own doctor appointments. In addition,
Handout 6-5: Medical Health Form (on page 93) helps young adults prepare for medical
appointments.
OAR’s Life Journey Through Autism: A Guide to Safety outlines the Safety Planning Cycle and
offers tips to help you and your young adult prepare for household, school, and community
safety risks (https://www.researchautism.org/resources).
Sexuality and Relationships
Autistic individuals are very often left out of the conversation about sexuality, almost as if they
are incapable of having sexual thoughts, feelings, and needs. In reality, many autistic people are
sexual beings, and all autistic people need the information and skills necessary to make healthy
decisions about sexuality. In discussions of this nature, it is important to address your young
adult based on their actual age, instead of their cognitive age, to ensure they are receiving ac-
curate and age-appropriate information.
As your child matures, it is necessary to educate them about the changes in their body and feel-
ings. Puberty can be a difficult time for adolescents, and especially confusing and challenging
for autistic individuals. You and your family should decide on the best way to address these
physical and emotional changes, while keeping open and positive methods of communication.
This is also a critical time to address relationships with members of the opposite sex or of the
same sex, appropriate social skills related to friendship and dating, and the differences between
the various types of relationships we encounter throughout life. As parents, it is important to
know what, if any, sexuality education is being provided by the school or any other support
organization.
Safety is a critical topic in general and as it pertains to sexuality and relationships. Your
child may lack certain skills (e.g., distinguishing between appropriate and inappropriate
CHAPTER 6: LIFE SKILLS
Preparing Early   83
behaviors) that would help them determine if a situation is safe. Discuss how to recognize
and avoid potentially dangerous situations that may occur as your child matures, includ-
ing advances from strangers, keeping in mind that many cases of abuse are perpetrated by
a known person. From an early age, it is crucial to teach the difference between appropri-
ate and inappropriate touching and behaviors. For learners with limited verbal comprehen-
sion, discrimination training in the form of stranger/friend and good-touch/bad-touch
(https://www.childhelp.org/subs/childhelp-speak-up-be-safe) remains important and can
often be taught with a combination of pictures and actual role-play instruction.
For more information on sexuality and relationship topics to discuss with your young adult,
visit https://www.researchautism.org/sex-ed-guide for OAR’s Sex Ed. for Self-Advocates guide.
Hobbies and Recreation
Many autistic learners have certain areas of interest or specific topics that they really like, for
instance, math, Lego, animals, computers, transportation, video games, or a specific movie or
TV series. As part of the transition planning process, consider how your young adult’s special
interests can be used to help them make friends outside of the classroom. For some interests,
there are related organizations that meet socially – anime clubs, science fiction clubs, computer/
technology clubs, chess clubs, robotics clubs, and so on. Introduce your young adult to these
groups and encourage them to participate. Meeting new people based upon a similar interest,
making a friend, and expanding potential support systems can be extremely helpful as your
child gets older. Handout 6-4: Exercise and Personal Health (on page 92) offers some helpful
tips for creating healthy routines, motivating your child, and de-stressing.
RESOURCES
▶ Autism NOW Center & Autistic Self-Advocacy Network. (2016). Accessing home and community-
based services: A guide for self-advocates. https://www.autisticadvocacy.org/book/accessing-hcbs/
▶ Griffiths, D. M., Richards, D., Fedoroff, P., & Watson, S. L. (Eds.). (2002). Ethical dilemmas:
Sexuality and developmental disabilities. NADD Press.
▶ Organization for Autism Research. (2019). Sex ed. for self-advocates. https://www.researchau-
tism.org/sex-ed-guide/
▶ Partington, J. W., & Mueller, M. M. (2012). The assessment of functional living skills guide – Essen-
tial skills for independence at home, school, and in the community. Behaviour Analysts, Inc.
▶ Roberson, K. (2010). Being a healthy adult: How to advocate for your health and health care.
https://www.rwjms.umdnj.edu/boggscenter/products/documents/transitiontoadulthealth-
care-en-complete.pdf
▶ Sicile-Kira, C. (2006). Adolescents on the autism spectrum: A parent’s guide to the cognitive, social,
physical, and transition needs of teenagers with autism spectrum disorders. The Berkeley Publishing
Group.
CHAPTER 6: LIFE SKILLS
Resources
84   
▶ Volkmar, F. R., & Wiesner, L. A. (2004). Healthcare for children on the autism spectrum: A guide to
medical, nutritional and behavioral issues. Woodbine House.
▶ Wrobel, M. (2017). Taking care of myself2: For teenagers and young adults with ASD. Future Hori-
zons.
KEY POINTS – CHAPTER 6
Support in living arrangements includes many options, ranging from hands-on
assistance to complete, independent housing.
Consider the living arrangement that may fit your young adult and build the
necessary living skill goals into their ITP.
It is important to teach skills that are meaningful for your young adult and
support them to be as independent as possible.
Adulthood and independence pose new risks and threats to your young adult.
Safety skills, from technology to relationships, remain important and coincide
with many life skills.
Chapter 6: Handouts/Activities 
CHAPTER 6: LIFE SKILLS
Resources   85
HANDOUT 6-1: Life Skills ✒
TOPIC RECOMMENDED
SKILLS TO TEACH
TIPS ON TEACHING SKILLS
Hygiene
✓ Bathe or shower
✓ Toilet, including menstru-
al care
✓ Brush teeth
✓ Wash face
✓ Apply deodorant and/or
body spray
■ Break down the skill into individual steps.
■ Laminate a sign with the steps and place it in
the shower or bathroom for easy reference.
■ Use pictures for quick reference.
■ Use numbers on the steps and number the spe-
cific items in the bathroom. For example, if Step
3 is brushing teeth, put the number 3 on the
toothbrush.
Grooming
✓ Shave
✓ Style hair
✓ Take care of nails
✓ Take care of contacts or
glasses
■ Consider alternatives to traditional razors, inclu-
ding clippers or liquid hair remover.
■ Explore different types of nail clippers that vary
in sharpness and the noise they make when
they clip, or teach your youth to use a nail file if
needed.
■ Assign specific days for the youth to clean their
glasses, making it a scheduled routine.
Dressing
✓ Get dressed and
undressed
✓ Identify clean and dirty
clothing
✓ Identify when to change
self when soiled
✓ Match clothing
✓ Select clothing for the wea-
ther
✓ Identify appropriate and
inappropriate clothing
■ Break down the skill into individual steps, using
visual aids with pictures as helpful reminders.
■ Include in the routine a step to automatically
put dirty clothing in the clothes hamper, in the
washing machine, etc.
■ Keep matching simple. Buy sets of clothing that
always are worn together.
■ Set temperature thresholds for wearing types
of clothing. For example, always wear a coat if
below 60 degrees, always wear gloves if under
30 degrees, etc.
Routines
✓ Follow a morning routine
✓ Follow an evening routine
✓ Wake up on time
✓ Leave home on time and
secure the home upon lea-
ving
■ Break down the skill into individual steps, using
visual aids with pictures as helpful reminders.
■ Use electronic reminders such as alarm clocks
or virtual assistants (e.g., Alexa, Siri, Google
Assistant).
■ Provide a visual reminder by the front door to
lock all doors, windows, etc.
CHAPTER 6: LIFE SKILLS
  87
TOPIC
RECOMMENDED
SKILLS TO TEACH
TIPS ON TEACHING SKILLS
Meals
✓ Prepare cold meals
✓ Use the microwave or
stove
✓ Understand food types for
balanced meals
✓ Identify spoiled and
undercooked food
✓ Package leftovers properly
■ Assign a day for menu planning and cleaning
for the week. This day the youth will identify
meals for the week and clean out any spoiled
foods from the home.
■ Use visuals of food groups to help in planning
well-balanced meals.
■ Explore different types of containers and
utensils for proper storage.
■ Teach how to date leftovers and make a routine
for throwing out foods after an assigned date.
Phone
Use
✓ Make a call
✓ Answer a call
✓ Write down details from
a call
✓ Maintain a phone book
■ Practice what to say, how to ask who is calling,
and writing down the information for a mes-
sage.
■ Memorize or program important phone num-
bers into the phone to assist with contacting
people.
■ Learn how to identify spam or fraudulent calls
and how to respond appropriately to them.
Household
Use
✓ Use various light switches
(bedrooms, kitchen, under
cabinets, etc.)
✓ Use a thermostat
✓ Open and close door and
window locks
✓ Use garage or electric
doors
■ Post visual reminders next to doors to turn
off lights or consider use of motion detection
lights.
■ Explore the use of smart systems for the home.
■ Keep a simplified list of instructions or tasks
for how to troubleshoot common remote
control issues such as changing the source,
low battery, etc.
Household
Care
✓ Wash dishes
✓ Do laundry
✓ Organize and pick up
belongings
✓ Vacuum or sweep
✓ Use disinfectant wipes
and sprays
■ Break down the skill into individual steps, using
visual aids with pictures as helpful reminders.
■ Create a list of home maintenance instructions
such as changing an air filter or replacing
smoke detector batteries.
■ Practice using basic tools, such as ham-
mers and screw drivers, at home before the
transition to other living arrangements.
✒ HANDOUT 6-2: Functional Skills
CHAPTER 6: LIFE SKILLS
88   
TOPIC RECOMMENDED
SKILLS TO TEACH
TIPS ON TEACHING SKILLS
Transportation
✓ Use a map or GPS device
for common routes
✓ Understand distance to
locations and when to walk
vs. use transportation
✓ Understand when and
how to use bus routes,
subway or train
✓ Understand how to use
a taxi
■ Determine whether a paper or an electronic
map is preferable. When using electronic maps,
teach how to navigate when the GPS fails or
does not have signal.
■ Encourage flexibility by teaching alternative
modes of transportation or routes when the
normal one cannot be accessed.
■ Identify common signs and visual signals for
public transportation.
Money
✓ Identify currency
✓ Use a credit card
✓ Understand bank services
✓ Make and maintain a
budget
■ Create a “cheat sheet” or list of reminders of
money services commonly used.
■ Set limits and clear rules for what can and
cannot be purchased with their credit card
■ Practice safe money storage and credit card
transaction skills.
Shopping
✓ Purchase clothing
✓ Purchase food
✓ Purchase household
supplies
✓ Identify the price with
discount tags
✓ Make a choice or selection
■ Create a list of items to purchase at the store,
including details such as size (for clothing) or
shapes and colors for novel items.
■ Remember that each store has different ways
to display a discount price; practice asking
store clerks for help.
■ When given a list or a menu of items, practice
reviewing all of the items and selecting their
choice.
Technology
✓ Conduct a job search
✓ Use social media
✓ Understand online
shopping
■ Create a list of job search engines and key
words for particular interests.
■ Keep passwords safe and protected.
■ Use all privacy settings when accessing social
networks.
■ Identify signs of online scams and phishing
attacks.
HANDOUT 6-2: Functional Skills ✒
CHAPTER 6: LIFE SKILLS
  89
✒ HANDOUT 6-3: Health and Safety Skills
TOPIC
RECOMMENDED
SKILLS TO TEACH
TIPS ON TEACHING SKILLS
Medication
✓ Follow a schedule for
routine medications
✓ Take the correct dose
✓ Schedule refills
✓ Use of over the counter
medications
■ Consider use of medicine bottle timers that
lock the medication closed until the next
dosage time.
■ Consider using visual reminders, timers, pill
dispensers, or other tools to ensure that
routine medications are taken correctly.
■ Specify what to do if they take the incorrect
type or number of pills.
First
Aid
✓ Maintain a first-aid kit
✓ Use bandages and basic
supplies
✓ Apply sunscreen
✓ Apply bug spray
■ To practice these skills, use training videos or
pretend scenarios with dolls/figurines.
■ For sunscreens or insect repellants, use lotions
or color-changing supplies that show when
areas have been missed.
■ Teach how to remove lotion or sprays from the
eyes or other surfaces.
Emergencies
✓ Know personal informa-
tion (e.g., name, phone
number, address)
✓ Know how to react during
a house fire
✓ Know who and how to call
for medical or personal
emergency
■ Keep an identification card in wallet or purse.
■ Teach how to request help when not home,
including how to accurately describe their
surroundings.
■ Practice escaping different houses or buildings
in the event of an emergency. Teach avoiding
elevators in case of fire.
Community
Safety
✓ Understand stranger
danger
✓ Travel in safe areas
✓ Know how to ask for help
✓ Know how to identify “safe”
staff in a public setting
✓ Understand the meanings
of emergency signs
■ Provide examples and discussion of appropria-
te vs. inappropriate touching, being mindful of
cultural norms.
■ When teaching “safe” community helpers, use
common individuals such as police officers,
store staff (e.g., are they wearing a name tag),
etc.
■ Use walks and outings in the community to
learn emergency signs. Find common signs
about electricity, heat, flooding.
CHAPTER 6: LIFE SKILLS
90   
TOPIC RECOMMENDED
SKILLS TO TEACH
TIPS ON TEACHING SKILLS
Health
✓ Understand symptoms
of common illnesses (e.g.,
cold, flu, allergies) and how
to treat them
✓ Understand how to care
for a skin rash
✓ Know when to call family
support or physician for
help
■ Create a health care binder with common
symptoms, how to treat them, and when to call
for help.
■ Use visual aids in the bathrooms as reminders
of handwashing and other hygiene tasks to
prevent illnesses.
■ Create a medical health form with medical
history and prescription details to bring to
and update at each physician visit (see Hand-
out 6-5: Medical Health Form (on page 93)).
Exercise
✓ Maintain a routine
✓ Complete specific activities
such as running, weight­
lifting, walking, etc.
✓ Travel to and use a local
gym
■ Establish a set schedule to complete exercise
activities each week.
■ Teach the importance of staying hydrated and
how to identify if they are straining themselves
while exercising.
■ A list of exercises, tips, and tricks is located in
Handout 6-4: Exercise and Personal Health (on
page 92).
Cybersafety
✓ Understand internet
social safety
✓ Understand financial
safety
✓ Understand cyberbullying
■ Warn that if meeting someone from the internet
in person, always bring a trusted person along.
■ Clarify when it is safe to share personally
identifying information (e.g., real name, address,
financial/credit card information, or Social
Security number).
■ If feeling uncomfortable online, for any reason,
exit the website and tell a trusted person.
■ Teach never to send pictures to unknown
people.
ACTIVITY 6-3: Health and Safety Skills ✒
CHAPTER 6: LIFE SKILLS
  91
✒ HANDOUT 6-4: Exercise and Personal Health
Exercise is an important way to maintain healthy habits and also aids in reducing stress.
Below is a list of exercises, tips, and tricks to motivate your young adult to maintain an
exercise routine.
Ways to Create Interest in Exercise Routines
▶ Biking – find a map of local trails and make a goal to bike through each one
▶ Boxing – explore a local gym to find a mentor to box with
▶ Dance and fitness classes – use the class to learn about various cultures and
music
▶ Jogging – set a goal to jog for the entirety of a favorite song
▶ Jumping rope – practice counting skills while jumping
▶ Karate – encourage your youth’s peers to join a class and work collaboratively
to earn belts
▶ Skating – start with a birthday party or social event with peers to create interest
▶ Swimming – don’t focus on swimming laps, but encourage any type of swim-
ming as exercise
▶ Team sports – create a backyard sports team to play soccer, football, etc.
▶ Walking – make a bingo sheet of local items to find in the neighborhood during
walks
▶ Weightlifting – ask the local gym for mentors or coaches to teach skills and pro-
vide encouragement
▶ Yoga – try new yoga classes such as yoga with goats to create interest
Tips and Motivators
▶ Join a gym with family or friends and set a dedicated schedule to attend each
week
▶ Set up community sports teams to play soccer or kickball
▶ Reward your young adult for exercising a specific number of times by given
them something related to their favorite hobby
▶ Buy your youth new workout clothes
▶ Create a game or competition; for example, whoever can make the most bas-
kets at the gym gets to pick where to go out to dinner
▶ Suggest reading a favorite book while on a stationary bike
▶ Take a fitness class together
▶ Dedicate time to create a favorite, healthy snack after the activity (trail mix,
apples with peanut butter, etc.)
CHAPTER 6: LIFE SKILLS
92   
ACTIVITY 6-5: Medical Health Form ✒
Medical appointments can be challenging for autistic young adults, even if routine with
a familiar doctor and staff. If your young adult struggles with providing their medical
information, this medical history form can be filled out by the family or caregiver and a
copy provided for each visit.
Contact Information
Name of Youth: Date of Birth:
Address: City:
State: Zip: Home Phone: 

Emergency Contact & Phone:
Medical Information
Height: Weight: Eye Color: Hair Color:
Scars or Identifying Marks:
Allergies:
Primary Diagnoses (e.g., ASD):
Other Medical Conditions:
Recent Medical History (surgeries, procedures, etc.):
Current Prescriptions (name and dosage):
Additional Medical Care Providers (name, specialty, phone):
Personal Information
Method of Communication (e.g., verbal, sign language, written, pictures):
Sensory, Medical, or Dietary Issues and Restrictions, if any:
Notes for a Successful Visit (include actions to avoid and any deescalation techniques):




CHAPTER 6: LIFE SKILLS
  93
7
LOOKING
AHEAD
Planning for your child’s future doesn’t end after high school. While it may be difficult to think
about a future when you are not around to care for your child, it is important to begin taking
the necessary steps to secure the supports and services they will need after your death.
At the beginning of the transition planning process, you brainstormed your adulthood goals
for your child, including goals related to quality of life, living, education, and employment.
As you begin planning farther into the future, you will need to address and compose legal
documents that articulate lifestyle, financial, legal, and other requirements for your young
adult’s continuing care.
PEOPLE INVOLVED
Begin by identifying key people who can assist you in the process. This should include, when
possible, your family, your autistic young adult, an attorney, a financial advisor, caseworkers,
medical practitioners, accountants, teachers, therapists, and anyone else involved in provid-
ing services to your young adult. In some cases, a professional known as a lifetime assistance
planner can be contracted to act as a “team” advisor to make sure that all parts of the plan are
coordinated and complete. Usually, however, this role falls to the parent, the transition coordi-
nator, or the autistic individual. Make sure that the attorney, financial advisor, and other plan-
ning professionals all have specific knowledge and experience serving people with disabilities.
DEVELOPING A LIFESTYLE PLAN
Lifestyle planning is a way in which the family records what they want for the future of their
loved one. This plan can be developed as a letter of intent written by you and can provide
CHAPTER 7: LOOKING AHEAD
information about your autistic young adult. The letter can include medical and treatment
history, current ability levels, and your hopes and goals for the future. The letter may cover:
▶ Interest in continuing education, forms of employment, and forms of residence
▶ Religious beliefs and practices
▶ Supports related to advocacy, behavior management, medication management, etc.
▶ Daily living instructions, such as for bathing, eating, and dressing
▶ Preferences and interests with regard to music, movies, games, and social and physical
activities
▶ Dietary needs and preferences
▶ Environmental preferences (e.g., does not like fluorescent lighting)
▶ Personal or idiosyncratic preferences (e.g., prefers a specific coffee mug)
▶ Medication guidance
▶ Any and all lifestyle options that will ensure quality, dignity, and security throughout
life
The letter of intent is not a legal document, but it provides important context to guide the
future care of your child. Emotionally, it records your feelings about the future as well as your
young adult’s goals. Practically, it provides detailed information on medical and behavioral
history, effective interventions and supports, your young adult’s strengths and challenges, and
specific care instructions. Some families even videotape daily tasks to illustrate key instruc-
tions. A detailed letter will help provide valuable insights for future caregivers and a smooth
transition.
Start your letter of intent now, and then revise and update it, as needed, to ensure that it
remains an appropriate resource for your young adult. You can find a template for a letter of
intent in Activity 7-1: Template for Letter of Intent (on page 101).
LEGAL PLANNING
Most of all, preparing for the future means establishing legal protections to ensure your wishes
are carried out as intended, in the best interests of your autistic young adult. Find a lawyer who
specializes in special needs and/or disabilities to help you create legal documents tailored to
your family. They will use appropriate language and methods to provide for your young adult.
The basic documents you should consider creating include a will, a Special Needs Trust (SNT),
and an ABLE account.
Will
After your death, a will provides specific, detailed plans for your estate and the care of your
young adult. If you do not have a will, the state usually divides your property and assets equally
96   
CHAPTER 7: LOOKING AHEAD
Legal Planning
among your family members, including your young adult. Because certain government ben-
efits have financial eligibility requirements, leaving your estate to your autistic young adult may
make him ineligible to receive these resources. Therefore, it is essential to prepare your will and
estate to maximize the benefits and protections, ensuring financial stability and continued care.
Supported Decision-Making
The ability to make our own choices helps determine our quality of life. Some people are more
equipped to advocate for themselves and problem solve, while others may need more or less
support in specific areas.
When your autistic young adult reaches the age of majority (i.e., becomes a legal adult), some
or all of your parental rights transfer to them. As an adult, they will be legally responsible for
making key decisions about their health, finances, education, living arrangements, and more.
If your autistic adult has limited capacity to make and communicate choices, or if you believe
they require protection from financial abusers, they may benefit from additional help to man-
age their affairs.
To help determine their ability to manage their own affairs and make decisions for themselves,
consider the following questions:
▶ Do they understand the circumstances surrounding a decision – why it needs to be
made, and when?
▶ Do they understand the consequences of the options made available?
▶ Are they able to identify the appropriate resources or people to negotiate and finalize
the decision?
Supported decision-making is a person-centered process of providing the least restrictive sup-
ports and services to help an individual make their own decisions and to increase structured
supports only as needed.
For your young adult’s safety and overall wellbeing, there are several support tools and re-
sources to consider. Here are a few options, ranging from limited to full support:
▶ Informal support in the form of advice from family and friends can help them make
informed decisions while maintaining decision-making power.
▶ Signed consent forms allow family members or friends to participate in the evaluation
process by granting them access to certain documents.
▶ A healthcare proxy is a person who is granted access to medical records and empow-
ered to make medical decisions on the autistic adult’s behalf.
▶ A power of attorney grants somebody authority to make decisions on specific mat-
ters of life (e.g., finances) on behalf of an individual who is absent or becomes incapac-
itated. The power of attorney can access records and have decision-making power in
specific areas such as financial management or education.
  97
CHAPTER 7: LOOKING AHEAD
Legal Planning
▶ Limited guardianship gives a court-appointed person (the guardian) the legal rights
to make decisions for the wellbeing of the autistic adult in specific areas, such as health
care or housing.
▶ Full guardianship is the most restrictive form of support, as it is a court-ordered
arrangement that transfers all decision-making power from the “incapacitated” adult
(“ward”) to the guardian. The guardian has full authority over all aspects of the ward’s
life, including health care, financial management, living arrangements, travel arrange-
ments, right to marry, and personal care. Full guardianship should only be used when
other options are not viable. However, for some individuals with greater support needs,
full guardianship is the only viable possibility. Under these unique circumstances, full
guardianship is designed to protect, not take away, the rights of the autistic individual.
For more information on decision-making support options, visit the National Resource Center
for Supported Decision-Making at https://www.supporteddecisionmaking.org. Remember,
laws around guardianship vary by state.
OAR’s Life Journey Through Autism: Navigating the Special Education System contains more de-
tailed information (https://www.researchautism.org/resources).
Special Needs Trust
A Special Needs Trust, or SNT, is a specific type of trust used for special needs planning. It is
a legal way for you to provide financial supports for your child to maintain a good quality of
life, while allowing them to remain eligible for certain government benefits, such as Medicaid,
Supplemental Security Income (SSI), Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI), and Medi-
care. Such funds cannot be used for basic needs and expenses such as housing, food, and medi-
cal treatments that would otherwise be covered by government benefits.
Many types of resources can be used to fund the trust, including your family’s savings, invest-
ments in stocks and mutual funds, IRAs, 401(k)s, real estate, home equity, and life insurance.
Because there are strict and constantly changing rules regarding trusts and government ben-
efits, it is important to work with an experienced lawyer who is familiar with estate planning
for special needs. In addition, a number of agencies may be able to help you establish an SNT.
Do your own research, consider getting referrals from other families who have already gone
through the process, and always consult with an attorney to ensure compliance with all relevant
federal and state regulations.
FINANCIAL PLANNING
Consider the financial resources necessary to support your adult child after your death. You
can begin by creating a detailed budget of expenses that includes everything from housing
98   
CHAPTER 7: LOOKING AHEAD
Financial Planning
to personal needs, both currently and in the future. This will give you an idea of how much
money will be needed to care for your young adult and help set a goal for building a trust
fund. The worksheet on future expenses, provided as Activity 7-2: Calculating Future Expenses
(on page 105), may help you with this process.
Next, consider how you will cover the costs and/or fund the trust. Don’t forget to include the
government benefits, such as Social Security, that your child may receive. Consider setting up
an ABLE account, which is a tax-advantaged savings account to help you save money for eli-
gible beneficiaries with disabilities that can go toward qualified disability expenses.
Here are some resources to help you determine what benefits and financial supports you and
your child qualify for.
Social Security Administration: https://www.ssa.gov/benefits/disability/
USA.gov: Disability Services: https://www.usa.gov/disability-services
A complete estate and financial plan can help provide comfort, mitigate family conflict, and
protect your child from predators when you are gone. A financial planner who specializes in
special needs can be a very useful in guiding you through this process.
Stepwise Preparation Process
The following is a stepwise plan to consider as you work to protect the special needs of your
young adult.
1. Prepare a life plan. Working together with your young adult, discuss residential needs,
employment, education, social activities, medical and dental care, religion, and end-
of-life arrangements. You can use many of the goals from transition planning as part
of this plan.
2. Write a lifestyle plan and letter of intent. Write down the goals for your young adult’s
future. Include information regarding care providers and assistants, attending physi-
cians, dentists, medicine, functioning abilities, types of activities enjoyed, daily living
skills, bereavement counseling, end of life care, and rights and values. An accompanying
videotape may help clarify your specific desires in any of these areas.
3. Determine finances. Use the worksheet in Activity 7-2: Calculating Future Expenses (on
page 105) to determine your young adult’s future expenses. Remember to include sav-
ings, life insurance, disability income, Social Security, and other government benefits.
4. Prepare legal documents. Choose a qualified attorney to assist in preparing wills, trusts,
powers of attorney, guardianships, living wills, and other planning needs.
5. Consider a Special Needs Trust (SNT). An SNT holds assets for the benefit of your
autistic young adult using the income to provide for their supplemental needs. If drafted
properly, assets are not considered income, so government benefits are not jeopardized.
Appoint a trustee to administer this trust.
  99
CHAPTER 7: LOOKING AHEAD
Financial Planning
6. Use a life plan binder. Place all documents in a single binder and notify caregivers and
family where they can find it.
7. Hold a meeting. Give copies of relevant documents and instructions to family members
and caregivers. Review everyone’s responsibilities.
8. Review your plan. At least once a year, review and update the plan. Modify legal doc-
uments as necessary.
These steps were developed by Barton Stevens, ChLAP, founder and Executive Director of Life Planning
Services in Phoenix, AZ.
RESOURCES
▶ ABLE National Resource Center: https://www.ablenrc.org/
▶ Mass Mutual: https://www.massmutual.com/lp/specialcare
▶ Special Needs Alliance: https://www.specialneedsalliance.org/find-an-attorney/
▶ Special Needs Answers: https://www.specialneedsanswers.com/
▶ A Special Needs Plan: https://www.aspecialneedsplan.com
KEY POINTS – CHAPTER 7
Planning your estate can be a poignant, challenging, and daunting process.
Start early and take a step-by-step approach to create important documents
for the future care of your autistic adult.
Future planning is a person-centered process; determine the appropriate level
of supported decision-making with your autistic young adult throughout this
process.
Chapter 7: Handouts/Activities 
100   
CHAPTER 7: LOOKING AHEAD
Resources
ACTIVITY 7-1: Template for Letter of Intent ✒
A letter of intent allows you to state your goals and wishes for your young adult’s future
after your death. Use this template to brainstorm/outline the major areas in your letter
of intent. Involve your young adult and be sure to highlight their goals for the future.
NAMES, ADDRESSES, AND PHONE NUMBERS OF CONTACT PEOPLE
These would be important contacts for the guardian of your child, such as case managers,
employer, lawyer, financial planner, and doctors.
DESCRIPTION OF YOUR CHILD
Give a detailed description of your child. Be sure to include their likes, dislikes, strengths, and
challenges. Describe a typical day and include daily living instructions.
CHAPTER 7: LOOKING AHEAD
  101
For each of the topics in the following sections, include as much information as possible.
In each area, state past development, current functioning, and wishes and goals for the future.
HOUSING/RESIDENTIAL
EDUCATION
EMPLOYMENT
✒ ACTIVITY 7-1: Template for Letter of Intent
CHAPTER 7: LOOKING AHEAD
102   
HEALTH CARE AND MEDICAL HISTORY
BEHAVIOR MANAGEMENT
Be sure to include treatments that have been or are currently being used, behavior modifica-
tion techniques that work, etc.
SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT
ACTIVITY 7-1: Template for Letter of Intent ✒
CHAPTER 7: LOOKING AHEAD
  103
RELIGIOUS ENVIRONMENT
OTHER
✒ ACTIVITY 7-1: Template for Letter of Intent
CHAPTER 7: LOOKING AHEAD
104   
ACTIVITY 7-2: Calculating Future Expenses ✒
Start putting together a list of potential costs for the care of your autistic young adult.
After you have completed the table below, you will need to give some thought as to
how many years you think you will need to prepare for, and multiply the table total
by that number. Remember, this is just an estimate. You can use this information as
you establish a trust or investments, or investigate government benefits.
TYPE OF COST AMOUNT PER YEAR
Rent
Utilities (phone, electricity, water)
Care assistance (live-in, respite, supervisory)
Personal care (haircuts, toiletries)
Entertainment (books, movies, magazines)
Allowance
Clothes
Transportation
Insurance
Training (for employment)
Education costs
Special equipment
Medical care
Treatment
Groceries/food
Medicine
Recreation (vacations, TV, sports, clubs)
CHAPTER 7: LOOKING AHEAD
  105
TYPE OF COST AMOUNT PER YEAR
TOTAL
✒ ACTIVITY 7-2: Calculating Future Expenses
CHAPTER 7: LOOKING AHEAD
106   
SOME FINAL COMMENTS
Successful transition to adulthood is commonly defined as a person having enhanced quality of
life and playing a productive role in society, such as through employment or further education.
Many autistic students struggle with this transition and continue to need coordinated services
and supports.
As you look over the horizon and begin to think about your child’s future, keep the following
in mind:
▶ Start planning as early as possible, and no later than age 16.
▶ Set high but realistic goals. It is easy to be successful when you set the bar too low.
Think big and have high expectations. Keep your eyes on the prize of your long-term
transition goals for employment, living, and/or postsecondary education. Frame all
your discussions with reference to those desired outcomes.
▶ To the maximum extent possible, work cooperatively with all involved in the process
to the benefit of the autistic young adult.
▶ Remember that transition planning is a process, and first drafts of ITPs are rarely the
final draft.
▶ Involve extended family and friends in the process, particularly in the area of employ-
ment, as they may have contacts and resources you do not.
▶ Reach out to families who have been through the transition process, as they are often a
valuable resource for advice, tips, and knowledge of opportunities.
▶ With reference to community skills, remember to teach where the skills are most likely
to be used. For example, it is more effective to teach grocery shopping at an actual
supermarket than it is to teach it in the classroom.
▶ Identify the level of “risk” with which you are comfortable, and then work to maximize
independence within that framework. (For example, while you may be uncomfortable
with your young adult crossing the supermarket parking lot without close supervision,
they may not need the same intensity of supervision inside the supermarket.) As the
young adult gains greater independence across tasks and environments, reassess your
acceptable level of risk.
▶ Remember, you are an essential part of this process.
▶ Good, effective transition planning is effortful and time consuming. Enhancing quality
of life and independence, with effective transition supports throughout the process, are
the ultimate objectives.
Transition planning is not about what is probable. It’s about what is possible! Effective transi-
tion planning involves high expectations, a bit of risk, tremendous cooperation, and significant
effort on the part of the young adult, their family and teachers, school administrators, com-
munity members, and adult service providers. The outcome of this concerted effort – enhanced
quality of life and independence – is worth the effort.
  107
CHAPTER 7: LOOKING AHEAD
Some Final Comments
Adulthood represents a time in one’s life where there are increased levels of independence, choice, and personal control. These
are all qualities that can and should be part of any autistic adult’s life. For many young autistic people and their families, the
transition to adulthood is a daunting one, marked by significant changes in available services. Proper planning can ease this
difficult transition, however, and ensure that all autistic individuals build the skills and establish the supports that will allow them
to take advantage of all that adulthood has to offer.
OAR’s Life Journey Through Autism: A Guide for Transition to Adulthood (2nd ed.) provides an overview of the transition to
adulthood process for parents who are traveling this path with their child for the first time. Packed with evidence-based tips,
resource recommendations, informational handouts, and activities for parents and young adults, the guide includes information
about how to:
• Initiate the transition planning process and engage your child, their family and friends, the school’s professional staff, and
representatives from adult service systems as members of your child’s transition team.
• Prepare for the changes in available supports and legal protections that accompany the transition to adulthood.
• Center the transition plan around the interests and strengths of your child.
• Equip your child with the self-determination skills they need to advocate for themselves, problem-solve, set goals, and
develop a plan for their own future.
• Prepare your child to navigate higher education, employment, independent living, and other relevant aspects of adulthood.
The Organization for Autism Research (OAR) is a national nonprofit organization dedicated to promoting research that can be
applied to help families, educators, related professionals, and autistic individuals find the much-needed answers to their urgent
questions.
Special recognition goes to Lori Lapin Jones PLLC for its continued interest in the needs of individuals with ASD. The development
and distribution of this guide were made possible thanks to the generous support of Lori Lapin Jones PLLC.
Special recognition also goes to the Embassy of the State of Qatar in Washington, D.C. for its continued interest in the needs of
individuals with ASD and for its generous support of this project.
ORGANIZATION FOR AUTISM RESEARCH
www.researchautism.org
